International Roundnet Federation Rules
(Adopted October 21, 2021, Updated August 10, 2022, Updated June 12, 2024)


Overview
Roundnet is a team sport played by two teams consisting of two players each. Opposing team
members line up across from each other with the roundnet set in the center. A point begins
when the server hits the ball off the net towards the opposing player. After the service, there are
no sides or boundaries. The object of the game is to hit the ball off the net in such a way that the
opposing team cannot successfully return it.
A team is allowed up to three touches to return the ball onto the net. Once the ball is played off
the net, possession switches to the opposing team. The rally continues until a team is unable to
legally return the ball. Players may move as they wish during a point, so long as they don’t
physically impede the opponent’s play on the ball.
Responsibility for fair play falls on the players. All players are expected to know the rules, and
the integrity of roundnet depends on each player upholding them. Highly competitive play is
encouraged, but never at the expense of mutual respect among competitors, adherence to the
rules, or the basic joy of play.


Chapter 1: Equipment and Court
1.1. Equipment
1.1.1. Regulation Equipment - IRF approved set and ball are to be used for official
tournament play.
1.1.2. Set Dimensions - The set is circular with an inner diameter at the top of 91.4 cm
(36 in) and a height of 20.3 cm (8 in) with a net on top.
1.1.3. Net Tension - The tension on the net should be consistent throughout. A ball
dropped from a height of 1.5 m (4.9 ft) from the ground should bounce 50 cm (19.7 in)
from the net, measuring from the bottom of the ball.
1.1.4 Ball Inflation - The air pressure of the ball should be between 2000 pascals and
3500 pascals (0.3 and 0.5 PSI) and a circumference of between 29 - 31 cm (11.4 - 12.2
in).
1.2. Court
1.2.1. Court Components - A roundnet court consists of the set, service lines, No Hit
Zone line, and designated playing space.
1.2.2. Court Setup - A minimum of 10 x 10 m (33 x 33 feet) is recommended for each
court, however, there are no out of bounds. The roundnet set is placed in the center of
the court.
1.2.3. Serving Lines - A serving line circle should be drawn 2.6 meters (8.5 feet) from the
center of the court. The distance from the edge of the set to the service line should be
2.13 meters (7 feet). Marks should be drawn at each of the four starting service
positions. When indoors or unable to draw lines, tape may be placed at equal intervals
around the set to outline a circle and service positions.
1.2.4. No Hit Zone Lines — A no hit zone line circle should be drawn 91.4 cm (3 feet)
from the center of the court. When indoors or unable to draw lines, tape may be placed
at equal intervals around the set to outline a circle. Additional marking of the No Hit Zone
is allowed (for example a turf mat) as long as it is safe and does not interfere with
gameplay.


Chapter 2: Participants
2.1. Team Composition - A team consists of 2 players.
2.2. Player Equipment / Clothing
2.2.1. Players may wear cleats, sneakers, or play barefoot at their own risk. Cleats with
dangerous parts, such as metallic baseball cleats, track spikes, or worn or broken studs
with sharp edges, are not allowed.
2.2.2. Players may wear anything that does not endanger player safety or provide unfair
advantage.
2.2.3. Players may not use clothing or equipment to unfairly inhibit or assist the
movement of the ball or another player. For example, players are allowed to wear hats,
but not allowed to throw their hats at the ball.
2.2.4. The tournament director reserves the right to refuse any player equipment or
clothing that does not abide by these guidelines.
2.3. IRF reserves the right to alter a team name, team logo, jersey graphic, or uniform if it is
inappropriate for the specific event or the organization as a whole.


Chapter 3: Playing Format
3.1. To Score a Point - Roundnet is played using rally scoring; points can be won by the serving
or receiving team. A team scores a point when:
3.1.1. The opposing team fails to legally return the ball to the set.
3.1.2. The opposing team commits a point-loss infraction.
3.1.3. The opposing team’s server has two successive faults.
3.2. Replay - A point is replayed when:
3.2.1. Teams disagree on the legality of a hit.
3.2.2. Teams disagree on an infraction.
3.2.3. Certain types of hinders occur, see Chapter 6 for details.
3.2.4. There is outside interference (ie a player, ball, or other object from outside a match
impedes on the game).
3.2.5. If a point is replayed due to disagreement on the legality of the serve, the server
will replay the point with the fault count at the time of the disagreement. Otherwise, the
server will start on their first serve. Score, positions and serving order remain the same
in all cases.
3.3. Rally - A rally is a sequence of playing actions between the moment the serve is hit to the
moment the ball is out of play.
3.3.1 If the serving team wins a rally, they score a point and continue to serve.
3.3.2 If the receiving team wins a rally, they score a point and must serve next.
3.4. To Win a Game - A game is won by the team that first scores the designated number of
points (typically 15 or 21).
3.4.1. Games must be won by two points unless otherwise specified. In the case of a
14-14 or 20-20 tie, play is continued until a 2 point lead is achieved (17-15 or 27-25).
3.4.2. Hard cap - according to the tournament director’s discretion, certain games can be
given a hard cap, meaning if the score is tied at a given number, the next point wins. For
example, in games with a hard cap at 25, if the score is 24 to 24, the game will be
decided by the next point. Hard caps should be set before the games start.
3.5. To Win a Match - A match is won when a team wins the designated number of games
(typically 2).
3.6. Forfeit - A team that is not able or refuses to play when summoned to do so may be subject
to a forfeit loss at the tournament director's discretion.
3.7. Deciding Serve/Receive
3.7.1. One game –The winner of a coin flip or one game of Rock, Paper, Scissors
(determined by TD) gets to choose serve/receive or starting positions.


3.7.2. Two game matches – In bracket play, the team with the higher seed gets to
choose serve/receive, starting positions, or defer in game one. If the higher seed defers
their choice, the lower seed gets to choose serve/receive or starting positions in game
one. The choice of serve/receive or starting positions will switch in the second game.
3.7.3. Three-game matches – If the match goes to a third game, there will be a coin flip
or one game of Rock, Paper, Scissors (determined by TD) and the winner is awarded the
choice of serve/receive or pick the starting positions in the third game.
3.8. Positions
3.8.1. The four players start set up in four positions around the set, 90 degrees apart.
Teammates are located next to each other. All players must start with all points of
contact behind the service line (exception see 3.8.4).
3.8.2. The established positions should be used for the duration of the match. The
positions will be indicated by a line marking when possible.
3.8.3. At the start of a game, the serving team sets their positions first. The player set up
on the right side is the one that will begin serving. Once the serving team is set, the
receiving team positions their players.
3.8.4. The receiver is the player that is positioned 180 degrees across from the server.
Once the server is set the receiver may adjust their position and is free to move
anywhere without distance restrictions.
3.8.5. Only the designated receiver can field the serve.
3.8.6. The other two players may only move from their positions once the ball is hit by
the server.
3.8.7. If the serving team wins the point, the server switches positions with their partner
and serves to the other member of the opposing team.
3.8.8. After every 5 points players rotate one position counterclockwise to equalize
conditions.
3.8.9. If a non-receiving or non-serving player takes a step before the ball is hit by the
server, they lose the point. In the case where both non-receiving and non-serving player
move before the ball is hit by the server, the team that moved first will lose the point. If
the infractions happen simultaneously the point will be replayed.
3.9. Time-outs
3.9.1. 60-second timeouts - Teams are allotted one 60-second timeout per game. The
time-out may not be called during a point. This time-out may not be called in between the
1st and 2nd serve. The teams may not leave the court area and should have refreshments
or equipment stored near the court before the match.
3.9.2. Injury timeouts – An injured player is given a maximum of 5-minutes recovery,
once per match. This time-out may be called whenever the injury occurs. See 3.13.1 for
details.
3.10. Time Between Points - Points should be played in succession without breaks. After the
rally has finished the ball should be recovered immediately. Once the ball has been recovered
and given to the server, all players must set their position. Any delay before “service” is


announced will result in a delay of game warning (see 4.5.1). Any subsequent violations against
the same team will result in (1) automatic use of a regular timeout, if still available, or (2) a loss
of point, if the team does not have a regular timeout remaining.
3.11. Time Between Games - Players will be given 3 minutes between games. Players should
remain near their court. Failure to be ready to start after the break will result in a delay of game
warning at 3 minutes. If players aren’t set within the next minute, one point will be given to the
opposing team. An additional point will be assessed for every minute teams are late.
3.12. Changing and Adjusting Equipment - In the case of a set or ball no longer being suitable
for play, the game shall pause while a replacement is found. When replaced, the game resumes
at the same score, player positions, and serving order and situation (ie 1st vs 2nd serve, # of
timeouts remaining, penalties/warning still in effect, etc.) as before. If a net gets moved out of
position or gets altered from its original state (ie a leg piece gets turned in, the net comes off a
hook, etc.) it should be returned to its original position and state before players set for the next
point. During a point players should play through natural movement of the equipment. However,
if the equipment should become unplayable (net snaps, ball pops, etc.), the point should be
stopped and replayed with any faults resetting.
3.13. Exceptional Interruptions
3.13.1. Injury - In the case of an injury, the game is stopped. Once the player begins to
receive care (if provided), they have 5 minutes to return to play. If the player is not able
to return to play before 5 minutes is up, the team must forfeit that game. If the player
returns to play and is injured again, they must return to play in one minute or be subject
to forfeit. Any further injury stoppage during the game that lasts more than 15 seconds
between points will cause the injured player to forfeit.
3.13.2. External interference - In the case of an external interference preventing the
game to be played, the game shall pause. When the game can be resumed, the game
continues at the same score, player positions, and serving order and situation (ie 1st vs
2nd serve, # of timeouts remaining, penalties/warning still in effect, etc.) as before.



Chapter 4: Serving
4.1. First serve of the game - The winner of a coin flip or one game of Rock, Paper, Scissors
(determined by TD) gets to choose serve/receive or starting positions. In bracket play, the
higher seed can choose serve/receive, side or defer (see 3.7).
4.2. Serving order
4.2.1 When a team’s score is even, the server will be to the right of their partner. When a
team’s score is odd the server will be to the left of their partner. Whenever a game starts
the serving team’s score is 0 so serving starts from the right. The service possession
switches once the opposing team scores a point. They now have 1 and thus start serving
from the left.
4.2.2. Order in a New Game - The process stated in 4.2.1 occurs each game so the
serving order does not need to stay the same for multiple games.
4.3. Serving Position - If the serving team wins the point, the server switches positions with their
partner and serves to the other member of the opposing team.
4.4. Characteristics of the serve
4.4.1. Before serving, the server must set their position with all points of contact behind
the 7-foot service line.
4.4.2. After setting the service position and during the act of serving – including the
swing, the follow-through, and the momentum from the action – all points of contact must
remain behind the service line.
4.4.3. At least one foot must maintain the same single point of contact with the ground
until the ball hits the net.
4.4.4. Sliding or dragging a foot on the ground at any point before the ball hits the net is
a violation.
4.4.5. The server may take one step in any direction.
4.4.5.1. A step is initiated the moment a foot no longer maintains a point of
contact with the ground.
4.4.5.2. Once the stepping foot contacts the ground again, it must establish and
maintain the same single point of contact on the ground until the ball hits the net.
4.4.6. The ball must travel at least 10 cm (4 inches) away from the point of release
before it is struck.
4.4.7. In the act of serving, the ball must not be caught.
4.4.7.1. A catch happens when the ball comes to rest on any part of the player.
4.4.8. Serves may not be higher than a receiver's shoulder when in an athletic stance.
(See 4.5.1.2.3 and 4.6.9)
4.5. Execution of the service
4.5.1. There are four steps to the serve: (1) The server announces the score to the
receiver, placing the serving team’s score before the receiving team’s score and the
serve number (“first” or “second”). (2) The receiver must verbally acknowledge readiness


within three seconds. (3) The server must announce “service” within three seconds.(4)
The server may begin their serving motion and has five seconds to toss the ball. Any
delays in this process are subject to a delay of game violation (see 3.10).
4.5.1.1. An incorrect score call may be identified by any player to reset the
serving process prior to the server announcing “service."
4.5.1.2. Positions and Restrictions during the Serving Process
4.5.1.2.1. Server: After the server announces the score, the server may
not step until after they announce service.
4.5.1.2.2. Server’s Teammate: After the server announces the score, the
server’s teammate may not step until after the serve is struck.
4.5.1.2.3. Serve Receiver: The serve receiver’s athletic stance (i.e.
shoulder height) is established upon acknowledging readiness.
4.5.1.2.3.1. A receiver’s athletic stance establishes their shoulder
height. An athletic stance is defined by the ability to quickly move
laterally and has the components of bent knees (no lower than 90
degrees), feet slightly wider than shoulder distance apart, and
chest positioned over feet.
4.5.1.2.3.2. If a receiver does not meet the definition of an athletic
stance causing a lowered shoulder height, they must be notified
before the server announces “service”. Upon notification, the
receiver must correct their stance to an acceptable position.
Failure to correct their position will result in a delay of game
penalty (see 3.10). Once the receiver has acknowledged
readiness they can lower their stance if desired.
4.5.1.2.4. Serve Receiver’s Teammate: After the serve receiver
acknowledges readiness, the serve receiver’s teammate may not step
until after the serve is struck.
4.5.2. The server is allocated two attempts to hit a legal serve.
4.5.2.1. If the server commits a service fault, only a player on the receiving team
has until the ball is hit for a second time, there is a change of possession, or
immediately (i.e. within ~3 seconds) after a dead ball to call “fault.” The server is
then allocated a second serve. If a second “fault” is called, the receiving team is
awarded a point.
4.5.2.1.1. If a fault occurs and then an infraction by the receiving team
occurs before the ball is hit for a second time or there is a change of
possession, the fault takes precedence over the infraction.
4.5.2.2. The receiving team may choose to play through a fault that is not actively
called by an observer. However, players may never play through 4.6.10 – 4.6.13.
Unless a call is made by a player or observer, the play is live. The receiving team
is not required to say anything if they choose to play through a fault.
4.6. Service faults



4.6.1. The ball is struck before traveling 10 cm (4 inches) away from the point of release.
4.6.2. After setting the service position or during the act of serving – including the swing,
the follow-through, and the momentum from the action – the server makes contact on or
within the service line. This includes contacting a player who is on or within the service
line.
4.6.2.1. It is a fault even if the ball is declared dead before the server makes
contact on or within the service line.
4.6.2.2. The server may only make contact on or within the service line after
demonstrating the momentum from the action has stopped and reestablishing
bodily control.
4.6.3. The ball is caught. See 5.3.2.
4.6.4. The server does not maintain one point of contact with their pivot foot until the ball
hits the net.
4.6.5. After taking a step, the server does not maintain one point of contact with their
non-pivot foot until the ball hits the net.
4.6.6. The ball hits the rim or legs directly.
4.6.7. Side Pockets
4.6.7.1. Side Pocket – after hitting a side third of the net, relatively parallel to the
ball’s incoming trajectory, the ball’s horizontal trajectory changes towards the
opposite side.
4.6.7.1.1. A ball hitting within the left third of the net and moving right or a
ball hitting within the right third of the net and moving left is a pocket.

4.6.7.1.2. Left or right side of the net is determined relative to a center line
parallel to the ball’s horizontal entry angle.


4.6.7.1.3. A ball hitting within the side pocket area and not moving the
opposite direction is legal.

4.6.8. After hitting the back third of the net, the ball does not move forward. Every part of
the ball must land beyond the farthest point of the set relative to the ball’s horizontal
angle of entry.
4.6.8.1. A ball that exits the back third of the net and moves sideways is legal so
long as it never contacts the side sections of the net.
4.6.9. Every part of the ball is over the highest point of the receiver’s shoulders at any
point from when the ball contacts the net to when the ball passes them or is contacted by
the receiver, whichever happens first. If, after acknowledging readiness, the receiver

lowers their shoulders, the shoulder height will be judged off their prior athletic stance. If,
after acknowledging readiness, the receiver raises their shoulders, the shoulder height
will be judged off their new position.
4.6.9.1. The ball passes the receiver when it breaks the plane perpendicular to
the line between receiver’s position and the center of the net.
4.6.10. The ball misses the set entirely.
4.6.11. The ball contacts the set (legs, rims, net) multiple times.
4.6.12. After the ball is served, the first contact is by a player on the serving team (i.e. a
player hits their partner with the serve).
4.6.13. The ball is released and not struck. Once the ball is released, dropping, catching
or swinging at and missing a toss all count as a fault.
4.6.14. The server does not toss the ball within five seconds after announcing “service”.

Chapter 5: Playing the Ball
5.1. In Play - The ball is in play from the moment the server strikes it until one of the following
occur:
5.1.1. A serving fault occurs and/or is called by the receiving team or an observer.
5.1.2. An infraction occurs and/or is called by any team or an observer.
5.2. Hitting the ball
5.2.1. A hit is any contact with the ball by a player.
5.2.2. A team is entitled to a maximum of 3 hits alternating between players for returning
the ball to the set.
5.2.3 Consecutive Contacts - A player may not hit the ball twice consecutively. Exception
see rule 5.3.5 and 5.3.6.
5.2.4 Simultaneous Contacts - If teammates touch the ball simultaneously it is counted
as two hits. Either teammate may take the next hit provided they have not already used
all three hits.
5.3. Characteristics of the hit
5.3.1. The ball may touch any part of the body.
5.3.2. The ball must not be caught.
5.3.2.1. A catch happens when the ball comes to rest on any part of the player.
5.3.3. Players may not hit the ball with two hands. Exceptions see rules 5.3.4 and 5.3.5.
5.3.4. At the first hit of the team on a possession, the ball may touch various parts of the
body, provided that the contacts take place simultaneously.
5.3.5. At the first hit of the team on a possession, the ball may contact various parts of
the body consecutively, provided that the contacts occur during one action. A player may
have consecutive contacts on the same hand (i.e palms to finger) as long as it does not
result in a catch and/or throw. These consecutive contacts count as one hit.
5.3.6 After the first hit of the team on a possession, a player may hit the ball once more
consecutively, if their first hit occurs before the ball begins a downward trajectory. This
action will be counted as a second hit.
5.3.6.1. Consecutive contacts as described in 5.3.6 are not allowed on serve
receive.
5.3.6.2. Consecutive contacts as described in 5.3.6 cannot result in an immediate
hit on the net.
5.4. Infractions in Playing the Ball
5.4.1. Four hits - A team hits the ball more than three times before returning it to the set.
5.4.2. Non-rebound - The ball is caught.
5.4.3. Two-handed hit – A player hits the ball with both hands simultaneously. Exception
see rule 5.3.4.
5.4.4. Double-contact - A player hits the ball twice in succession or the ball contacts
various parts of his/her body in succession. Exception see rule 5.3.5.

5.5. Hits on the net
5.5.1. Illegal hits on the net - When the ball is returned to the set, the return results in a
loss of point for the hitting team if:
5.5.1.1. The ball contacts any part of the ground.
5.5.1.2. The ball’s initial contact with the set hits the rim, legs or underside of the
net directly.
5.5.1.3. The ball bounces multiple times on the net or bounces on the net then
hits the set on the way down.
5.5.1.4. The ball never exits the net.
5.5.2. Pocket - During a rally, any shot that changes the trajectory of the ball due to the
ball’s proximity to the rim, without contacting the rim (i.e. pocket) is legal. See rule 4.6.7
for pockets on a serve.
5.5.3. Roll-up - A shot where the ball lands completely on the netting, and subsequently
rolls into the rim and then off the net (i.e. roll-up) is legal.
5.5.4. Change of Possession
5.5.4.1. Possession changes once the ball comes off of the netting. Neither team
may contact the ball while it is in contact with the net.
5.5.5. Other hitting violations. All result in loss of point.
5.5.5.1. A defensive player attempts to play the ball out of turn.
5.5.5.2. An offensive player hits a shot off the net which subsequently hits
themselves or their teammate (includes serves).
5.5.5.3. A player is in contact with the ball while the ball is in contact with the net.
5.6. No Hit Zone
5.6.1. The 90 cm (3 feet) area from the center of the net is the No Hit Zone. The final hit
of all possessions must be initiated outside of this area.
5.6.2. It is a loss of point for the hitting team if on the final hit of the possession the
hitting player makes contact on or within the No Hit Zone while in the act of hitting. This
includes contacting a player who is on or within the No Hit Zone. (i.e. the hitter may not
use another player inside the No Hit Zone to reestablish their bodily control.)
5.6.2.1. The act of hitting includes the swing, the follow-through, and the
momentum from the action.
5.6.2.2. It is a loss of point if the player’s momentum causes the player to contact
anything within the No Hit Zone, including another player.
5.6.2.2.1. If the player is unable to avoid the No Hit Zone due to the
proximity of an opponent, the hinder (Chapter 6) by the defender
precedes a No Hit Zone violation by the hitter. If neither player on the
defending team would have had an opportunity for a return, the hitter's
team is awarded the point even if this hinder is unavoidable.
5.6.2.3. It is a loss of point even if the ball is declared dead before the player
makes contact within the No Hit Zone.
5.6.2.4. The hitter may only make contact within the No Hit Zone after
demonstrating the momentum from the action has stopped and reestablishing
bodily control.



5.6.2.5. If equipment inadvertently falls off a player’s body and lands in the No Hit
Zone, it is not a violation. For example a hat falls off and lands in the No Hit
Zone.
5.6.3. If a player has touched the No Hit Zone for any reason, that player cannot make
the final hit of a possession until both feet have made contact with the playing surface
completely outside the No Hit Zone.
5.6.4. A player may enter the No Hit Zone at any time except when that player is making
the final hit of a possession.
5.7. Contact with the Set - Contact with the set by a player (rims, legs, or netting) during a rally
results in a “Set Contact” infraction for the offending player and is a loss of point for that team.
This includes contact from equipment that has fallen off a player.
5.7.1. If natural movement of the equipment pushes the set into a player, the set contact
is not considered a violation and the point should be played out.


Chapter 6: Hinders
6.1. The players whose turn it is to play the ball are entitled to freedom from interference by the
opponents.
6.1.1. The order in which players can legally contact the ball determines who has the
right of way. A player that can legally contact the ball before another player has the right
of way.
6.2. To avoid interference players that are not playing the ball must make every effort to provide
the other players with:
6.2.1. Unobstructed direct access to the ball after completion of a reasonable followthrough;
6.2.2. Freedom to hit the ball with a reasonable swing;
6.2.2.1. To ensure player safety, when a hitter is within their arm’s reach of the
net, the defensive team may not enter the imaginary cylinder rising from the rim.
If they do so, it will result in a point for the hitting team.The opposing team may
enter the cylinder after the hitter's follow through is complete.
6.2.2.2. A player’s follow-through can contribute to interference for the opponent
when it becomes the latter's turn to play the ball. If a player moves in the
direction of their hit causing immediate interference a replay may be given (see
6.7).
6.3. A hinder occurs if the opponent fails to fulfill any of the requirements of 6.2.1 or 6.2.2, even
if the opponent makes every effort to fulfill those requirements.
6.4. A player encountering a possible hinder has the choice of continuing to play or of stopping
play.
6.4.1. A player seeking a replay or point should stop play immediately and say “Hinder.”
6.5. A replay or point shall not be allowed if:
6.5.1. There was no interference or the interference was so minimal that the player’s
freedom to get to and play the ball were not affected;
6.5.2. Interference occurred but there is no opportunity for a return, giving benefit of the
doubt to the hindered player.
6.5.2.1. The player making every effort to get to the ball (short of dangerous physical
contact) is a significant factor in determining if they would have an opportunity for a
return. In any questionable situation player safety should be the number one priority.
6.5.3. The player moved past the point of interference and played on;
6.5.4. The player created the interference in moving to the ball by taking an indirect route
while the opponent provided direct access.
6.5.4.1. This occurs when the opponent clearly provides a direct access but the
player takes an indirect route. This is different from a situation in which a player,
in attempting to recover from a position of disadvantage, does not have direct
access to the ball. In this situation the player anticipates the opponent hitting the
ball one way, starts moving that way, but having guessed wrongly, changes
direction to find the opponent in the way. If the player sufficiently demonstrates
that they would have had a good touch then 6.6 - 6.7 will determine the outcome
of the hinder.



6.6. The hindered team will receive a point if there was interference, which the opponent did not
make every effort to avoid, and the player would have had an opportunity for a return.
6.7. The hindered team will get a replay if there was interference, which the opponent made
every effort to avoid, and the player would have had an opportunity for a return.
6.7.1. Any faults reset.



Chapter 7: Participant Conduct
7.1. Sportsmanlike Conduct
7.1.1. Participants must know the Official IRF rules and abide by them.
7.1.2. Participants must play with integrity. The responsibility of fair play is first and
foremost on the players. If a participant knows that they committed any sort of violation,
it is their obligation to call it immediately (exception 4.5.2.1).
7.1.3. Participants must accept observers’ decisions with sportsmanlike conduct, without
disputing them. In case of doubt or confusion, clarification may be requested.
7.1.4. Participants must refrain from actions or attitudes aimed at influencing the
decisions of the observers.
7.1.5. Participants must abide by timing regulations. See delay of game in 3.10 and 3.11.
7.2. Fair Play - Participants must behave respectfully and courteously in the spirit of fair play, not
only towards the observers, but to opponents, partners, spectators, or tournament personnel.
7.3. Misconduct - Inappropriate conduct by a player towards observers, opponents, partners,
spectators, or tournament personnel is classified in three categories according to the
seriousness of the offense.
7.3.1. Rude conduct - Action contrary to good manners or moral principles.
7.3.2. Offensive conduct - Defamatory or insulting words or gestures or any action
expressing contempt.
7.3.3. Aggression - Actual physical attack or aggressive or threatening behavior.
7.4. Misconduct Sanction Scale
7.4.1. Warning -The first rude conduct of the match by a player is sanctioned with a
warning by the observer or tournament director.
7.4.2. Penalty - The second rude conduct of the same match by the same player is
penalized with a point awarded by the observer or tournament director. The first
offensive conduct of the match by a player is penalized with a point awarded by the
observer or tournament director.
7.4.3. Disqualification - The third rude conduct of the same match by the same player is
sanctioned by tournament disqualification by the observer or tournament director. The
second offensive conduct of the match by a player is sanctioned by tournament
disqualification by the observer or tournament director. The first physical attack or
implied or threatened aggression is sanctioned by tournament disqualification by the
observer or tournament director.
7.5. Misconduct before and between games/matches - Any misconduct occurring before,
between, or after games/matches are sanctioned according to rule 7.4 and sanctions apply in
the following games. If not observed by a tournament official, this misconduct should be
reported to the tournament director. Once a player receives a penalty, they will no longer get
warnings in subsequent matches for that event. Sanctions will start at the penalty level.


Chapter 8: Making Calls and Settling Disagreements
8.1. Calling Service Faults - see 4.5.2.1.
8.2. Hitting and Play Infractions - Hitting infractions (like a direct rim hit) or play infractions (like
contact with the set) must be called immediately after occurrence by saying “violation” and
stopping play.
8.3. Calling Hinder - Hinders must be called immediately after occurrence by saying “hinder” or
“violation” and stopping play.
8.4. Disagreements - If teams cannot determine the legality of a hit, serve, or call (when
observers are not present), they must replay the point. Teammates do not have to agree with
each other for that team to issue a disagreement. If three players think one thing and the fourth
player still disagrees after discussion this merits replaying the point.
