Victoria Lynn Arnold
NOTE: Always check with your veterinarian first before giving your dog any new foods, especially “people foods.” What might be okay for one dog might not be good for your dog, depending on multiple factors, such as their age, health history, health conditions, and diet. Dogs on prescription diets should not be fed any food or treats outside the diet.
Would you like to share a peach with your pup as a snack? Peaches are one of the many safe fruits that dogs can eat—both puppies and adult dogs.
White peaches are much sweeter and less acidic than yellow peaches, so their sugar content is higher. But because both types of peaches have lots of sugar, they should only be given to your dog in moderation, and without the stem or pit. 
Here’s what you need to know about feeding dogs peaches.
Yes, peaches can be a good treat for healthy dogs, in moderation. They are high in fiber and low in calories and fat. They are also filled with great antioxidants that help strengthen the immune system, prevent cell damage, and fight against disease. Plus, they contain all the following vitamins and minerals:
There are a few potential downsides to giving dogs peaches as a snack. They do have a high sugar content, and ingesting too much sugar over time can lead to health problems like diabetes and obesity, which can lead to hip and joint problems. 
Puppies also have more sensitive stomachs than adult dogs, so they might not react well to eating a new, sugary food. 
Another concern is the pit. The pit—or stone—in a peach is quite large. Always remove it, because it could become a choking hazard or cause an intestinal blockage.  
The pit also contains a sugar-cyanide compound that is toxic to dogs. Signs of cyanide toxicity are:
If your dog accidentally eats the peach pit, or you notice any of these symptoms, contact your veterinarian and take your dog to the vet clinic immediately. 
Although peaches are healthy and safe for dogs, store-bought peach yogurt isn’t a great idea. Flavored yogurt from the store usually contains a lot of added sugars, preservatives, and sometimes xylitol, which is toxic to dogs. 
You can make your own peach yogurt by mixing peaches with plain yogurt that has no sugars or artificial sweeteners
Canned peaches are not a great idea for a doggy treat, either. They contain lots of added sugar that is unhealthy for your dog and may give them an upset stomach.
Frozen peaches could be a fun treat, but there are a few concerns to watch out for. If they are store-bought frozen peaches, they may have extra sugar and preservatives added. And store-bought frozen peaches usually come in large chunks that could become another choking hazard for your dog. The best option is to cut up small pieces of fresh peaches and freeze them.
How much is too much? Any treat for a dog—even a healthy treat like peaches—should only make up a maximum of 10% of their daily diet, while the other 90% should come from a well-balanced dog food diet. Each piece should be no larger than ½-inch cubes.
Check out this list for general guidelines on how much peach to feed your dog.
If you’re nervous that your dog ate too many peaches, watch out for the following symptoms:
If you notice any of these symptoms, contact your veterinarian. 
Below are a few safe and fun ways to feed peaches to your sweet pup as a treat. And when you’re introducing any new food to your dog, make sure to only feed them a little piece first. Remove the stem and pit and cut the peach into small 1/2-inch cubed pieces. 
If you’d like to add some variety up your dog’s regular mealtime, just mash a little bit of sliced peaches and mix it with your dog’s usual food as a food topper.
Blend some peach slices with other dog-safe fruits like bananas, blueberries, and strawberries. Give your dog a little bit as a treat, use it as a food topper, or freeze it in your dog’s KONG toy for later. Serve your dog no more than 2 tablespoons of smoothie per 10 pounds of dog.
Blend or mash up some peach slices and mix it with plain, sugar-free, xylitol-free yogurt. You can add other dog-safe fruits to this mixture if you want, then feed it to your pup cold. Or freeze the fruit pieces the night before, and then blend the frozen fruit with the plain yogurt to make a dog-friendly frozen yogurt. Serve your dog no more than 2 tablespoons of yogurt per 10 pounds of dog.
You can stuff any of the mixtures above into your dog’s KONG toy, or freeze it for a refreshing frozen treat later. Frozen treats are also helpful in keeping your pup occupied longer. 
If you want to give your pup dehydrated peaches, use a dehydrator at home. Keep in mind that it will have a higher concentration of sugar at this point. But homemade dehydrated fruit is still much healthier than store-bought because dried fruit from the store usually has much more sugar added, and sometimes extra preservatives. Make sure the pieces are very small to avoid choking.
Image Credit: iStock Photo/Vera Kornienko
WRITTEN BY
Victoria Lynn Arnold
Freelance Writer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.