Nicole LaForest, LVT, BSc, MPH
Dogs are the most popular pets in the U.S., but allergies can make being around them tricky. This is what makes hypoallergenic dogs appealing to many people with dog allergies. But what, exactly, makes a dog hypoallergenic?
Here’s what to know about some of the best dogs for allergies.
All dogs produce allergens, but hypoallergenic dogs are specifically bred to produce fewer allergens in their hair. This can make them a good fit for some people with allergies.
However, no dog is 100% allergen-free. Even dogs that don’t produce a lot of dander still contain allergens in their skin, saliva, and urine, which can trigger an allergic response such as coughing, itching, or wheezing.
While there is no such thing as a completely hypoallergenic dog, there are dog breeds that may be a better fit for some people who tend to react around pups. Here are some of the best hypoallergenic dogs.
There are three types of Poodles, and each has a reputation for being hypoallergenic. These dogs don’t shed much and are known for their high intelligence. The Standard Poodle was originally bred for hunting and is the largest of the three, while the Miniature Poodle and Toy Poodle were both bred to be smaller versions of this breed. No matter what size your Poodle is, this breed needs lots of care paid to their curls so they don’t become tangled and matted.
Little Yorkies are cute hypoallergenic dogs with spunky and affectionate personalities. They adapt well to many different living situations, from large homes to studio apartments, as long as they get plenty of attention from their family.
Another small hypoallergenic dog, the Shih Tzu is an ancient companion breed. They’re known for their thick coat and friendly temperament. However, their flat face means they can be susceptible to some health issues, including overheating, breathing problems, and tear stains.
There are three Schnauzer breeds, and the Miniature Schnauzer is the smallest. Standing no more than 14 inches tall and weighing 10–20 pounds, these smart dogs fit into many different living environments. Just make sure they get at least an hour of exercise every day.
The larger Standard Schnauzer shares a lot of the same qualities that make Miniature Schnauzers popular pets, just in a slightly larger package. These dogs can weigh as much as 45 pounds and love to spend their days taking long walks, playing fetch, and solving puzzle toys. 
Capable of reaching heights of over 27 inches and weighing up to 85 pounds, Giant Schnauzers are among the biggest hypoallergenic dogs. They need lots of exercise to be happy, such as long walks, neighborhood runs, weekend hikes, and games of fetch.
Small, playful, and affectionate, the Bichon Frise is a petit pup with a curly hypoallergenic coat. Because they’re highly intelligent and highly trainable, Bichons can quickly master training basics with positive reinforcement and go on to learn fun tricks to entertain the family.
The Chinese Crested is a small breed known for their unique appearance. There are two varieties: hairless and powderpuff. A powderpuff Chinese Crested is covered in long, silky hair, whereas a hairless Crested has smooth, soft skin with tufts of hair on their head, tail, and paws. Both varieties are hypoallergenic, and the breed is playful, affectionate, and a great companion.
This medium-sized breed was originally bred as an aid to fishermen in Portugal. Because their thick, curly coat does not shed much, Portuguese Water Dogs are a popular hypoallergenic dog breed. They are also intelligent, highly trainable, and friendly. These water dogs are high-energy pups, and regular exercise (like swimming) keeps them happy and healthy. 
A Labradoodle is a crossbreed between a Labrador Retriever and a Poodle that was originally bred to be a hypoallergenic service dog. They are intelligent, friendly, and make excellent family pets. Moreover, Labradoodles are highly trainable and gentle, especially when well-exercised and socialized from an early age.
Goldendoodles are another popular doodle dog developed over the past few decades. Like the Labradoodle, these dogs don’t shed much, have a friendly nature, and are highly intelligent. While many are known for their golden coat (thanks to their Golden Retriever parent), Goldendoodles can come in a wide range of colors and textures. They need frequent grooming to prevent matting.
Lagotto Romagnolo dogs were bred originally as water retrievers, and their curly, woolly coat would protect them from chilly waters. While less common than other hypoallergenic dogs, Lagotti Romagnoli (the proper plural of the breed’s name) can be good with children and other pets, making them good family dogs.
Affenpinschers are small hypoallergenic dogs known for their monkey-like appearance. Their dense, wiry coat produces fewer allergens than many other dog breeds, but it requires lots of care through at-home brushing and stripping, a process where the hair is removed by the root instead of trimmed. 
Friendly, intelligent, and highly trainable, Irish Water Spaniels are another water dog breed originally bred for retrieving game. Their thick, curly coat requires regular grooming and is always liver (brown) in color. Exercise is essential to keep an Irish Water Spaniel happy and healthy, as the breed has a high energy level.
An Aussiedoodle is a cross between an Australian Shepherd and a Standard or Miniature Poodle. This hypoallergenic dog is very smart and very energetic, thanks to both parent breeds. Lots of exercise and mental stimulation are needed to keep an Aussiedoodle happy. If they become bored, they can be destructive.
Bolognese are cute hypoallergenic dogs that originated in Italy. They have a long, fluffy white coat that needs lots of grooming despite its characteristic messy appearance. These playful and easygoing pups have a reputation for getting along well with children and other pets, and Bolognese can fit into all types of living situations.
Another small hypoallergenic dog, the Maltese is known for their luxurious white coat. Maltese make affectionate and playful companions for pet parents who can keep up with their grooming needs, especially if you want your dog’s hair long. To make grooming easier, give your Maltese a short “puppy” cut.
The Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier is a medium-sized Irish breed. As the name implies, this dog has a silky coat that’s incredibly soft to the touch and doesn’t shed a lot. Because they’re terriers, Wheatens maintain a high energy level throughout their life and need ample exercise and stimulation to be on their best behavior.
A small hypoallergenic breed that originated in Madagascar, Cotons de Tulear are easygoing pups. Their good nature makes them a good fit for other pets and kids, especially when introductions are made properly.
While many doodle breeds are a mix of a Poodle and an allergenic dog, the Schnoodle combines two hypoallergenic dog breeds: the Schnauzer and Poodle. Their coat can be curly or wavy, depending on what they inherit from their parents, but it’s always low-shedding.
Often called “a lamb in dog’s clothing,” the Bedlington Terrier is a small, curly-haired breed known for their distinctive topknot hairdo and pom-pom ear tufts. This dog loves being beside their people and can develop separation anxiety if left alone for long periods.
Mexican Hairless Dogs, also known as Xoloitzcuintli, are one of the oldest and rarest dog breeds. This breed comes in three sizes (toy, miniature, and standard) and can be hairless or covered in a short coat. Both hairless and short-coated Xolos are hypoallergenic dogs.
When a Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier is crossed with a Poodle, the result is a Whoodle: a friendly dog that doesn’t shed very much at all. These dogs inherit their intelligence and affectionate nature from both parent breeds.
Bernedoodles are a crossbreed between Bernese Mountain Dogs and Poodles. Their friendly, affectionate nature and gentle demeanor makes these large hypoallergenic dogs a popular pick for families with children and other pets. Just make sure to give them plenty of exercise, as these dogs need to stay active.
Another cross between two hypoallergenic dogs, the Shorkie is a mixed breed created from Shih Tzu and Yorkshire Terriers. They’re the best of both breeds: small, playful, and friendly. But like most dogs on this list, they require dedication to a regular grooming routine.
Afghan Hounds are known for their long, flowing coat and slender builds. These pups are built for running and are one of the fastest dog breeds in the world. Afghan Hounds are loving toward their family but can be aloof toward people they’ve just met, so early and consistent socialization is vital for this breed.
The Barbet is a cheerful pup with a shaggy, woolly coat. Pronounced “bar-bay,” the name Barbet is from the French word barbe, which means beard, a nod to the dog’s characteristically hairy chin. This big hypoallergenic dog loves to swim, thanks to their protective curly coat.
The Shih-Poo mixed breed is a cross between a Shih Tzu and a Poodle (most commonly the Toy Poodle). This small pup can do well in almost any living situation, as long as they get 30 minutes of exercise and a good brushing session every day.
Though Peruvian Inca Orchids are rare dogs, they are hypoallergenic thanks to their nearly hairless bodies. They are an ancient dog breed that comes in three sizes (small, medium, and large), and they’re the national dog of Peru.
As a cross between the Maltese and Shih Tzu, the Malshi is a happy, small hypoallergenic dog. They thrive when their favorite humans are close to them and need close companionship to be happy.
There are a few things pet parents need to be aware of before purchasing or adopting a hypoallergenic dog.
Hypoallergenic dogs require some extra care and maintenance to ensure a clean and allergen-free environment. Keeping the dog’s coat clean and reducing dander in the home requires regular grooming and bathing. Ideally, dogs should be groomed every week and bathed every four to six weeks. Using a special shampoo such as Allerpet® Dog Dander Remover can help reduce pet dander for those allergic to dogs. 
Many hypoallergenic dogs also require regular trimming, hand-stripping, and/or other grooming upkeep. Make sure you have the budget to visit a professional groomer regularly, or learn how to groom your pup at home.
Minimizing allergens also means cleaning and maintaining your home. It’s important to vacuum, dust, and wash your bedding regularly to minimize pet dander. You can reduce allergens in the air by using air purifiers and keeping the house well-ventilated.
Managing allergies and preventing allergic reactions is crucial when living with a hypoallergenic dog. The best way to manage allergies is to consult with your healthcare provider. There are many ways to treat allergies, including medication, nasal sprays, and injections. It’s also important to avoid close contact with the dog’s saliva or urine, as these can also trigger allergic reactions.
Bringing home a hypoallergenic dog can be a great way to improve the quality of life for individuals with allergies. These dogs allow those with allergies to experience the joy and companionship of pet parenthood without constantly having allergic reactions.
Featured Image: urbazon/E+ via Getty Images
WRITTEN BY
Nicole LaForest, LVT, BSc, MPH
Veterinarian Technician
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.