 
Your journey of grief will not take on a prescribed pattern or series of stages.  While you are actively mourning your loss, consider the following: 
The experience of loss is different for everyone and can present unique challenges.
The deafening silence—The silence in your home after the death of a pet may seem excruciatingly loud. While your animal companion occupies physical space in your life and your home, many times their presence is felt more with your senses. When your pet is no longer there, the lack of their presence—the silence—can become piercing. It becomes the reality of the “presence of the absence.” Merely being aware of this stark reality will assist in preparing you for the flood of emotions.
The special bond with your pet—The relationship you shared with your pet is a special and unique bond, and some people might find it difficult to understand. You may have well-meaning friends and relatives who think you shouldn't mourn for your pet or tell you that you shouldn't be grieving so much because “it’s just a cat” or “just a dog.”  Your grief is normal, and the relationship you shared with your special friend needs to be mourned.
Grief can’t be ranked—Sometimes our head gets in the way of our heart’s desire to mourn by trying to justify the depth of our emotion. Some people will want to “rank” their grief, comparing their grief emotions with others whose grief might be “worse.” While this is normal, your grief is your grief and deserves the care and attention of anyone who is experiencing a loss.
Questions of spirituality—During your grief journey, you may find yourself questioning your beliefs regarding pets and an after-life. Many people around you will also have their own opinions. It will be important during this time for you to find the answers right for you and your individual and personal beliefs.
 
This information is based on AVMA's client brochure, Pet Loss and Grief, developed with help from Coleen A. Ellis, CT, CPLP.
Understanding feelings of loss can help pet owners prepare and process their grief. Keep this information on hand, whether at home or in the clinic.
Download

Also in Spanish: Pérdida de Mascotas y Aflicción