Every home contains a variety of everyday items and substances that can be dangerous or even fatal to pets. You can protect your pet by being aware of the most common health hazards and taking steps to prevent accidents.
Don’t wait! Time is critical for successfully treating poisoning. Pick up the phone and call your veterinarian, or the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (1-888-426-4435) or Pet Poison Helpline (1-855-764-7661). A consultation fee may apply. Be prepared to provide your pet’s breed, age, weight, and any signs of illness. Keep the product container or plant sample with you to help identify the source of poisoning so appropriate treatment recommendations can be made.
Other first aid tips for pet owners
Special caution to bird owners
Most hazards listed here apply to your pet bird, particularly if the bird is allowed outside of the cage. In addition, birds are especially sensitive to inhaled particles and fumes from aerosol products, overheated nonstick pots and pans containing polytetrafluoroethylene (Teflon), essential oils, tobacco products, certain glues, paints, and air fresheners. 
To be safe, keep your bird away from areas where such products are being used. This includes kitchens, where exposure to cooking fumes, smoke, and odors may cause severe illness or even death.
Remember: Keep all medications sealed and stored securely, out of reach.
Keep information about common household hazards on hand, whether at home or in the clinic.
Download
Also in Spanish: Peligros domésticos
Many foods are perfectly safe for people, but could be harmful or even deadly to pets, especially if eaten in large amounts. To be safe, keep the following food items off your pet’s menu (and reach):
Always keep garbage out of a pet’s reach. It may contain items that can lead to intestinal problems (including blockage, vomiting, and diarrhea) or pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas), a painful and potentially life-threatening illness.
Many household cleaners can be used safely around pets. The key to safe use lies in reading and following product directions for use and storage. For instance, if the label says, “Keep pets and children away from area until dry,” follow those directions to prevent possible health risks.
Products containing bleach can safely disinfect many household surfaces when used properly. But if pets get hold of them, they can cause stomach upset, drooling, vomiting, diarrhea, severe burns if swallowed, and respiratory tract irritation if inhaled in a high enough concentration. In addition, concentrated solutions can produce serious chemical burns if they come in contact with pets’ skin. Some other detergents or disinfectants can cause a similar reaction, and cats can be particularly sensitive to certain ingredients such as phenols. 
As a general rule, store all cleaning products in a secure cabinet out of the reach of pets, and keep them in their original packaging, or in a clearly labeled and tightly sealed container.
As with household cleaners, read and follow label instructions before using any type of insect control or prevention product in your pet’s environment. For example, flea and tick products made specifically for dogs (such as those containing permethrin) should never be used on cats or other species because they may cause serious or even life-threatening problems. Always ask your veterinarian about the safe use of these products for your pet.
If a pet eats rat or mouse poison—or an animal that has eaten this poison—potentially serious or even life-threatening illness can result. When using any such poisons, it’s important to place them in areas completely inaccessible to pets. Some rodent poisons such as bromethalin have no known antidote, and can pose significant health risks to animals and people. 
Medications used to treat human conditions are among the top causes of reported pet poisonings in the U.S. Never give your pet any medication, including non-prescription medicines and dietary supplements, unless directed by your veterinarian. 
Here are just some examples of medicines/supplements that can harm pets: 
Fluorouracil, a chemotherapy drug that also is found in certain medicated skin creams and solutions, is a leading cause of poisoning deaths in dogs. Dogs may be exposed to the drug by chewing on the container or licking skin where the drug has been applied.
To keep your pet safe, it’s best to keep all medications—including pet medications—sealed and stored securely, out of your pet’s reach. Pets also need to be prevented from licking people’s skin after medicated creams or solutions have been applied. 
To keep your pet safe, keep all medications sealed and stored securely, out of reach. 
Special note: Narcotics—like morphine, oxycontin, hydrocodone, fentanyl, etc.—can cause severe illness or death in pets. This is the case regardless whether they are prescribed legally or obtained illegally. Unless prescribed specifically for your pet by your veterinarian, never give your pet narcotics.
Bath and hand soaps, toothpaste, and sunscreen products should be kept away from pets. They can cause stomach upset, vomiting, or diarrhea if swallowed. Keep toilet lids closed to prevent pets from drinking toilet water treated with toilet bowl cleaning agents, which could irritate their digestive tract.
Many other items in the home can be harmful to pets and need to be kept out of reach. 
Keep all marijuana and cannabidiol (CBD) products, especially edibles, out of the reach of pets. When pets eat or inhale tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the main component of marijuana that produces a high in people, it can cause stumbling, lethargy or agitation, tremors/shaking, urine dribbling, and other problems. Signs of a CBD overdose in pets include vomiting and diarrhea. 
Antifreeze and coolants that contain ethylene glycol, even in small quantities, can be fatal to pets when swallowed. While antifreeze products containing propylene glycol are less toxic, they also can be dangerous. Other substances routinely stored in the garage also pose threats to your pet’s health. These include things like fertilizers, pest or weed killers, ice-melting products, and gasoline.
When chemical treatments are applied to grassy areas, be sure to keep your pet off the lawn for the manufacturer’s recommended time. If pets happen to get these chemicals on their legs or body, they may lick them off, causing stomach upset or more serious problems.
Paint thinners, mineral spirits, and other solvents are dangerous and can cause severe irritation or chemical burns if swallowed or contacting your pet’s skin.
While most latex house paints typically cause minor stomach upset, some artist’s or other specialty paints may contain heavy metals or other substances that could be harmful if inhaled or swallowed.
Many household and yard plants can sicken your pet if eaten. These are some of the most common plants and plant material that should be kept away from pets:
A few other potentially harmful plants include the yesterday-today-and-tomorrow plant (Brunfelsia species), autumn crocus (Colchicum species), and glory lily (Gloriosa species).    
Holidays and visitors can pose a special challenge to your pets. Discourage well-meaning guests from spoiling pets with extra treats and scraps from the dinner table. Besides the risk of your pet being fed something toxic, fatty, rich, or spicy foods can be too much for your pet’s system to handle, causing vomiting, diarrhea, and pancreatitis. Cooked chicken, turkey, and other soft bones can splinter and damage your pet’s mouth or digestive system.
Although trick or treating is fun for children, Halloween treats like chocolate or xylitol-sweetened candy are toxic to pets. Certain holiday decorations also can harm pets if swallowed. In particular, string-like items such as ribbons or tinsel can become trapped in your pet’s intestines, requiring surgical removal. So make sure nothing is left on the floor or on tables within reach. 
Various holiday plants like lilies, poinsettias, holly, and mistletoe can cause an upset stomach or worse when eaten. Christmas tree water treated with preservatives (including fertilizers) also can cause an upset stomach. Further, water that is allowed to sit for long periods in tree stands can contain bacteria that could cause nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Fireworks, picnics and other 4th of July traditions can be great fun for people, but frightening and dangerous for animals. Know how to keep your animals safe.
Don't feed your pets Halloween candy, especially if it contains chocolate or xylitol (a common sugar substitute); Make sure your pet has proper ID...
Thanksgiving can carry some hazards for pets. Follow these tips to keep your pets healthy and safe during the holiday.
 
December abounds with holiday celebrations, and nothing can spoil good cheer like an emergency trip to the veterinary clinic. These tips can help keep the winter holiday season safe for pets.