There are unique considerations for horses and livestock during a disaster. Preparing ahead of time and acting quickly are the best ways to keep you and your animals out of danger. Protect your whole family and farm when emergencies arise with the proper supplies, veterinary information, animal identification and an evacuation plan that has been practiced.
Being prepared means:
Find all these tips and more in AVMA's Small Farm Preparedness guide (also in Spanish: Preparación para Granjas Pequeñas).
Be prepared for a disaster with an animal evacuation kit. Talk with your veterinarian when developing your kit, and assemble the kit well in advance of any emergency.
*These items must be rotated and replaced to ensure they don't expire
Download a printable version of this checklist (also available in Spanish).
Be prepared for a disaster with an animal evacuation kit. Talk with your veterinarian when developing your kit, and assemble the kit well in advance of any emergency.
*These items must be rotated and replaced to ensure they don't expire
Download a printable version of this checklist (also available in Spanish).
Prepare your emergency contact list now, before disaster strikes. You may need it during a disaster or while evacuating, and rescue personnel responding to a disaster affecting your animals may need it, too. Keep a copy with your evacuation kit.
Include addresses and 24-hour contact numbers, if available. If you use the Medical ID function on your mobile device, be sure one of the contacts is aware of your animal disaster plan.
Download emergency contact cards for livestock and pets (English and Spanish).
AVMA resources help veterinary teams be prepared for any kind of emergency.
Get the full disaster preparedness guide for small farms: Small Farm Preparedness.
Download

Also in Spanish: Preparación para Granjas Pequeñas
Donate to the American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) to help support the veterinary teams who care for animals in disasters.
Donate now
Smoke from wildfires and other large blazes affects pets, horses, livestock and wildlife. If you can see or feel the effects of smoke yourself, you also should take precautions to keep your animals—both pets and livestock—safe.
Learn more
Be prepared to take care of pets and other animals, especially during disasters such as fire, flood, or other emergencies.
Learn more