Leptospirosis is a disease caused by infection with Leptospira bacteria. These bacteria can be found worldwide in soil and water. There are many strains of Leptospira bacteria that can cause disease, and many mammals are susceptible—including dogs, people, livestock, and certain wildlife. Although cats also may become ill, this happens only rarely.
Leptospirosis is more common in warm climates with high annual rainfall, but it can occur anywhere, especially after heavy rainfall and flooding. For dogs, the midwestern, eastern, and southwestern regions of the United States are considered hotspots of infection.
All dogs are at risk of leptospirosis, regardless of age, breed, lifestyle, geographic location, time of year, and other factors. The following situations can increase that risk:
The signs of leptospirosis in dogs vary, depending on the strain of the infecting bacteria, the dog's immune response, and other factors. Some infected dogs have no signs of illness; some have a mild and transient illness and recover on their own; and others develop severe, life-threatening illness.
For dogs that do become ill, the signs tend to be non-specific. These are the most common signs:
The disease can progress to kidney and/or liver failure. Some dogs may develop severe lung disease and rapid, difficulty breathing. Damage to the heart muscle has been suspected in some cases.
Leptospirosis also can cause bleeding disorders, which can lead to blood-tinged vomit, urine, feces (stool), or saliva; nosebleeds; and pinpoint red spots on the gums or other mucous membranes, or on light-colored skin. Fluid can build up in the body, causing swollen legs or excess fluid in the chest or abdomen.
Leptospirosis may be suspected based on the exposure history and signs shown by the dog, but many of these signs can also be seen with other diseases. In addition to a physical examination, your veterinarian may recommend a number of other tests such as blood tests, urine tests, radiographs (x-rays), and an ultrasound examination.
Leptospirosis is most often spread through the urine of an infected animal, especially (but not only) wild rodents. Infected dogs can seem healthy but still pass Leptospira bacteria in their urine. The bacteria can survive for weeks to months in urine-soaked soil.
Dogs typically become infected when their mucous membranes (as in the mouth, nose, or eyes) or skin wounds (like cuts or scrapes) are exposed to urine or urine-contaminated water or soil. Infection can also be spread through urine-contaminated food or bedding, or the tissues or carcasses of infected animals. There also are rare instances when exposure to Leptospira bacteria occurs through breeding with or being bitten by infected animals. An infected mother dog may pass the bacteria to her unborn puppies through the placenta.
Because leptospirosis can look like other diseases, your veterinarian will need your help to make a diagnosis. This includes sharing information about your dog's lifestyle and travel history, which can help highlight possible exposure to Leptospira bacteria. In addition to a complete physical exam, your veterinarian may recommend certain blood tests, urine tests, X-rays, and an ultrasound exam. The choice of recommended tests is usually based on the nature and severity of the illness.
Leptospirosis is generally treated with antibiotics and supportive care. Depending on how sick an affected dog is, they may require fluid therapy, certain medications, and nutritional support. Dogs with severe disease may need intensive care measures such as oxygen therapy, mechanical breathing support, or dialysis.
When leptospirosis is treated early, the chance of recovery is good. However, there is still a risk of permanent residual kidney or liver damage. For dogs whose kidneys are struggling to pass urine despite supportive treatment, a referral for dialysis may provide support until the kidneys recover function, and can be lifesaving. Dogs with severe respiratory disease are less likely to recover, even with treatment.
Fortunately, vaccines are available to protect dogs from this potentially life-threatening disease. Because of the risk and severity of leptospirosis, experts recommend that all dogs be vaccinated. This can help protect people from infection, too. An initial series of two vaccinations spaced 4 weeks apart is typically recommended, followed by annual boosters. This series can be started at 12 weeks of age or later. Contrary to some beliefs, leptospirosis vaccines are no more likely to cause side effects than are other common vaccines.
Reducing your dog's exposure to possible sources of Leptospira bacteria can reduce the chance of infection:
Although an infected dog is unlikely to infect you and your family, there still is some risk. Infected dogs also may infect other pets in the home. The following precautions can help protect you all:
If you are ill or if you have questions about leptospirosis in people, consult your physician. If you are pregnant or immunocompromised, consult your physician for advice.
Keep leptospirosis information on hand, whether at home or in the clinic.
Download
Also in Spanish: Leptospirosis en perros y gatos
A general reference guide about diseases that outdoor enthusiasts (such as campers, canoers/kayakers, backpackers and hikers) and their companion animals may encounter.
Learn how canine influenza impacts pets, and how you can help prevent the virus from spreading.
Learn the signs of canine infectious respiratory disease complex (CIRDC), or “kennel cough,” and how to protect your pet from this highly contagious illness affecting the respiratory tract in dogs.