Toxoplasmosis is a disease caused by a microscopic parasite called Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii). Nearly all warm-blooded animals are susceptible to Toxoplasma infection, including most pets, birds, livestock, rodents, people, and other mammals. However, pet cats and other cat species are the only ones in which the parasite can reach the adult stage and sexually reproduce. This makes cats key players in spreading T. gondii.
In the early stage of infection, cats can pass millions of tiny egg-like Toxoplasma "oocysts" in their feces (poop). After about 1 to 5 days in the environment, these oocysts become infective.
People and animals can become infected by swallowing soil, plants, or water contaminated with infective oocysts. Once inside the body, parasites from these oocysts form microscopic cysts and become dormant. These cysts may remain in place for the rest of the animal's life, with no ill effects. In all animals but cats, the parasite's life cycle generally stops there. However, in cats, something extra happens. Once the parasite enters the intestines, it begins to reproduce, generating more oocysts that are shed in the cat's feces for about 1 to 3 weeks, and the cycle begins again.
Infection doesn't always cause disease. In fact, most infected people and animals have no symptoms or signs at all. Even so, certain at-risk groups may develop severe or life-threatening disease. These include certain marine mammals (like sea otters and seals), fetuses, the very young, and the immunocompromised (individuals with weakened immune systems).
You can help protect yourself, your cat, and others by learning how toxoplasmosis is spread and taking simple steps to prevent that from happening.
In addition to spreading through cats' feces, the parasite can be spread in other ways as well.
About 15% to 40% of domestic cats in the U.S. have antibodies against T. gondii, meaning they became infected with the parasite at some point in their lives. For cats allowed outdoors, the most likely source of infection is prey animals containing tissue cysts. For indoor-only cats, it's raw or undercooked meat containing these cysts.
Signs of Toxoplasma infection depend on a variety of factors such as the cat's age, immune status, and stage of infection. Most infected adult cats appear healthy. However, kittens and some cats may develop disease, with signs like the following:
For developing feline fetuses and newborn cats infected through their mothers, outcomes are typically severe, with effects like these:
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that over 40 million people in the U.S. are infected with T. gondii. This infection may last for a lifetime.
While most people don't even know they're infected due to a lack of symptoms, some pregnant women and many immunocompromised people are at risk of severe complications. Women infected prior to pregnancy usually will have immune protection (antibodies) against the parasite, and are not considered at risk of illness themselves, or of passing the infection to their unborn child. The situation is different for women infected for the first time while pregnant. In those cases, infection can cause complications that mostly affect the developing fetus: such as miscarriage, stillbirth, or birth defects similar to those described for feline fetuses and newborn kittens. These complications tend to be more severe if the mother is infected during the first trimester, rather than later on. Although most infected infants show no symptoms at birth, many are likely to have symptoms later in life.
Immunocompromised people, such as those with HIV or receiving certain chemotherapy, may experience severe disease, regardless of when they were first infected. Symptoms can include fever, confusion, headache, seizures, nausea, and poor coordination.
The good news is that it's certainly possible for these higher risk groups to have cats and enjoy the many benefits they bring, without needing to give them up. In fact, simply handling cats is unlikely to cause an infection. If you're pregnant or immunocompromised, be sure to discuss any concerns with your healthcare provider and veterinarian and to follow tips for preventing infection.
No vaccine is available to protect against T. gondii, but some simple precautions can reduce the risk of exposure to the parasite and subsequent infection. Keep in mind that you're more likely to be infected with T. gondii from undercooked meat or the environment than you are from your cat.
Keep toxoplasmosis information on hand, whether at home or in the clinic.
Download
Also in Spanish: Toxoplasmosis