For additional, more specific information on traveling with animals, including updated regulations, see Animal travel and transport. 
There are numerous considerations you should take into account:
All of the following are important:
You should bring the following items with you:
Many states require an up-to-date Certificate of Veterinary Inspection from a licensed, accredited veterinarian when traveling. Your pet must be examined by a veterinarian in order for a health certificate to be issued. This certificate basically indicates your pet is healthy to travel and is not showing signs of a disease that could be passed to other animals or to people. Certain vaccinations must be up to date for a health certificate to be issued. As part of the exam, your veterinarian may check for heartworm disease and prescribe heartworm preventative medication. When you return home, your veterinarian may recommend a follow-up examination to make sure that your pet did not pick up any diseases or parasites while traveling.
You will need a Certificate of Veterinary Inspection to travel and some airlines require an acclimation certificate. Both of these certificates can only be completed and signed by a federally accredited veterinarian. If your veterinarian is not federally accredited, you will need to find an accredited veterinarian in your area, by contacting your USDA Area Office.
View our video about travel certificates for pets and livestock.
Yes, but keep in mind that you have to follow both the United States regulations as well as the regulations in the other country to which you are traveling.
You should contact the Consulate or Embassy in that country to find out their regulations. Talk to your veterinarian about the risks of disease to your pet and have your pet vaccinated appropriately based on the risks. Some countries (and Hawaii) require quarantine of your pet upon arrival, Knowing the requirements before you travel helps you decide if you are going to take your pet or leave it at home, and prepares you for what to expect if you do take your pet with you.
Yes. The same rules apply when taking your pet camping. Talk to your veterinarian about flea, tick and heartworm prevention as well as specific risks associated with camping outdoors. (such as leptospirosis and other diseases).
Keep your pet on a leash and in your sight; and be considerate of other campers. Clean up after your pet.
Being outside, your pet can be exposed to many different wild animals like skunks, raccoons, snakes and other animals that can injure your pet or expose them to disease. Do not let your pet chase or come into contact with wildlife—it can be dangerous for both your pet and the wild animal.
View our information for outdoor enthusiasts.
Traveling by Plane | Traveling by Boat | Traveling by Car | Traveling by Train or Bus
The following preparations will help both you and your pet:
The following will help you choose flights that are appropriate:
On the day of your flight:
This is a form your veterinarian may consider signing that will waive the low-temperature federal regulation for animals traveling in the cargo hold, as stated in the Animal Welfare Act.
Always check with the airline and your veterinarian well in advance. If your pet is traveling in the cargo hold and temperatures at the departure or destination airport are expected to be below 45°F, your pet definitely will need an acclimation certificate in order to travel. Some airlines may require acclimation certificates even when temperatures are not expected to be below 45°F. Note that not all animals are appropriate to have an acclimation certificate issued, so your veterinarian may not issue an acclimation certificate even if an airline requires it for your pet to travel.
Tranquilization reduces anxiety and induces a sense of tranquility without drowsiness, while sedation has a more profound effect and produces drowsiness and hypnosis. In most cases, it’s not recommended that pets be sedated for air travel. However, it may benefit some animals to be tranquilized for air travel. Discuss this with your veterinarian well in advance of your expected travel date. If your veterinarian recommends tranquilization for your pet, be sure to follow the veterinarian’s exact dosing recommendation. In many cases, the same drug used for tranquilizing can result in sedation at higher doses.
Airlines may require a signed statement that your pet has not been sedated prior to flying.
If you are considering traveling with a short-nosed dog, visit our FAQs about short-nosed dogs and air travel for more information.
It is best to purchase an approved crate prior to travel (at the airline or local pet store) so you have time to let your pet get used to the crate and be comfortable. If your pet is small and can fit comfortably in an airline approved carrier, your pet may be able to travel with you in the cabin.
Approved crates should:
For personal boats, take time to allow your pet to become familiar with your boat.
Bring the following items:
You can train your dog to use a piece of astroturf, a box of sod or newspaper. For cats and other small animals that use litter boxes, make sure there is a covered litterbox secured to the floor inside the boat.
To prepare for traveling with your pet on a cruise:
Here are some other things you should think about:
If your pet does not ride well in a car, consider leaving your pet at home, with friends or family, or in a boarding facility.
To keep your pet safe and healthy:
Most states restrict the travel of pets on trains or buses. Exceptions are made for guide or service dogs. Check with your carrier to find out if your pet can come with you and what rules and regulations apply.
*In order for veterinarians to sign a health certificate and/or acclimation certificate for pet travel, they must be accredited by the USDA. 