gorodenkoff/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
Just like humans, dogs commonly experience back pain at one point or another during their lives. Sometimes this pain can be chronic due to an underlying health issue, while other times it’s just temporary discomfort caused by a muscle strain, for example.
If your dog is showing signs of back pain, it’s important to bring them to the veterinarian for diagnosis and appropriate treatment to relieve discomfort and improve quality of life.
Back pain in dogs refers to any type of discomfort a dog may experience, which could be related to muscles, bones, ligaments, or skin.
The physical issue in the back, such as a muscle strain, causes the dog to perceive pain and react accordingly, such as by whining or moving stiffly.
The dog will continue to react this way until the pain is no longer felt, either through healing of the injury or medical management.
The most obvious sign of back pain in dogs is when they cry out when touched in the affected area or when moving around.
If you are unsure whether the pain is due to back pain, closely observe your pet’s body language. For example, if the dog’s leg is the source of the pain, they will likely hold it up or limp. Similarly, if the dog’s back is painful, they will probably walk more slowly, appear to be stiff, or have a strange stance, such as a hunched posture.
Because dogs may be reactive when in pain, it’s important to not touch or move any areas of their body. This can cause an accidental bite or may even worsen the condition.
If you think your dog is in pain bring them to a veterinarian, who can safely locate the source of pain, diagnose the health issue, and form a treatment plan for your pup.  
Common symptoms of back pain in dogs may include:
Howling or whining
Stiffness
Abnormal posture
Bunny hopping (when dogs hold both back legs together and hop when walking)
Back tenderness
Trembling
Increased panting
Decreased appetite
Lethargy
Arching back
Restlessness
Walking slowly
Behavior changes, such as irritability
Difficulty relieving themselves
Many health issues that can trigger back pain in dogs, including:
Intervertebral disc disease (IVDD). This disease is common in dogs with long backs, such as Dachshunds. IVDD refers to a breakdown between the bones of the spine causing a herniated disc.
Osteoarthritis. As dogs age, the cartilage that normally cushions the joints breaks down. This results in abnormal joint movement and inflammation, which causes significant discomfort.
Trauma. Events that cause trauma to the spine or back can cause pain. These may include being hit by a car, falling from a great height, or fighting between dogs.
Muscle strain. Just like humans, dogs can move abnormally and develop strained muscles. Muscles tend to tighten, leading to tension and pain. 
Infections. Many types of infections can lead to back pain due to inflammation. For example, discospondylitis occurs due to a bacterial or fungal infection in the spine.  
Cancer. If a tumor develops near the spine, it can create pressure in the affected area and subsequent pain.
Obesity. Too much weight on your dog’s bones can cause stress on the spine and surrounding muscles. This extra weight can put unnecessary strain on the back and lead to pain.
Working with your veterinarian is the best way to determine whether back pain is present in your dog.
To diagnose back pain, your vet will start with a thorough physical exam. Your dog’s posture will be noted, and their stance and gait will be watched for abnormalities. Your dog’s back will be gently pressed along the spine to see if they show any signs of discomfort, such as crying out or abruptly moving away.
If your vet suspects your dog is experiencing back pain but is unsure of the cause, testing can be done, which may include:
Neurological exam. Your vet will check various reflexes to identify whether the spinal cord is affected. Weakness, delayed response, and absent reflexes are noted.
Imaging. X-rays, CT scans, or an MRI can be used to identify any abnormalities within the back that could be contributing to pain. 
Bloodwork. While this won’t diagnose back pain, it can provide insight as to whether your pup has signs of infection or inflammation that could necessitate a closer look.
Treatment for back pain in dogs varies based on the underlying cause. Possible treatment options may include medication, surgery, physical therapy, and acupuncture.
Dogs who are overweight may be started on a weight loss diet, such as Purina® Pro Plan® Adult Weight Management dog food, under the supervision of a veterinarian, to alleviate the strain on the their back.
Various pain medications can be used to treat back pain in dogs. They include the following:
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, such as Galliprant®
Muscle relaxants, such as methocarbamol
Antibiotics, such as Rilexine®
Antifungals, such as itraconazole
Dogs may require back surgery for resolution of their pain. This is the case for some dogs who have back pain due to trauma, as well as many dogs with IVDD.
Surgery is typically done at a specialty veterinary hospital by an orthopedic surgeon and can cost anywhere from $2,000 to $6,000 depending on the type of surgery and location of the veterinary hospital.  
Pet insurance may help cover the associated costs of surgery in many cases, depending on your pup’s age, health, and how the pain was triggered. It’s always helpful to research pet insurance, specifically when it comes to surgery.
Recovery for dogs with back pain depends on the diagnosis, and each dog will take their own time healing.
Dogs with muscle strains typically feel better in just a couple of days, while dogs who have surgery may need six to eight weeks to recover. Many dogs undergoing surgery may require a support sling to help them walk.
While recovering at home, don’t allow your dog to jump onto objects, such as furniture, or roughhouse with other pets. They should not engage in vigorous exercise. Going outside on a leash for a short walk or potty break is best.
The most common back injury in dogs is intervertebral disc disease. It’s especially common in dogs with long backs and short legs, such as Dachshunds.
Dogs with back pain can experience a wide variety of symptoms including whining, abnormal posture, panting, trembling, and difficulty walking.
Ideally, dogs with back pain should not be picked up because the wrong movement can exacerbate their condition and cause reactivity, such as a bite. However, if your veterinarian has given you specific instructions on picking your dog up, follow those carefully to keep you and your dog safe.
Dogs with back pain may see improvement with natural treatment, such as massage, acupuncture, or physical therapy. Discuss these options with a veterinarian to see if they would be helpful for your dog, as the treatment plan will be based on the underlying reason trigger their pain.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Brittany Kleszynski is a veterinarian and freelance medical writer who specializes in creating meaningful content that engages readers...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.