Chalabala/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
Dogs generally regulate their water intake well, but there may be times when you notice you’re not filling the water bowl as frequently, or your dog is not acting like himself.
You may wonder, “Why is my dog not drinking water?”
There are various reasons dogs may stop drinking water, which range from lack of interest to illness.
When pet parents notice a change in their dog’s water intake without an obvious cause (such as spending less time outside in the heat), it’s time to see your veterinarian.
Health Tools
Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.

Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.
The amount of water a dog should drink per day is highly variable based on his overall health, diet, and activity level. However, the standard guideline is that a dog should drink one ounce for every pound he weighs.
If your dog has been exercising a lot on a hot day, he will likely want more water than this. Similarly, a dog who has underlying Cushing’s disease requires a larger amount of water than the standard amount.
It’s important to take note of any changes to your individual dog’s water consumption. If you generally refill his water bowl during the day and suddenly it’s left untouched, pay a visit to your veterinarian.
There are various reasons why dogs may drink less water than normal or refuse to drink at all. Some of these include the following:
Diet: Canned food contains more water compared to dry kibble. Therefore, dogs eating canned food may not need to drink as much water as those fed kibble to receive the same fluid intake.
Dental disease: If a dog is experiencing pain in their teeth or gums, eating and drinking may be less desirable. The temperature of the water can also cause sensitivity in the teeth when underlying dental issues are present.
Gastroenteritis: If a dog’s stomach is upset, he will likely not want to drink any water. This can be due to dietary indiscretion, nausea, or underlying disease, such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
Arthritis: When dogs age, their joints can deteriorate and become painful and stiff. Dogs may be unable to get up to walk to their water bowl or they may be in so much pain they simply refuse to drink.
Other underlying illnesses: When dogs don’t feel well, they may lack appetite and thirst. They simply do not feel like drinking water. Cancer and painful bladder infections may cause decreased thirst.
Behavioral abnormality: Dogs who are feeling anxious, stressed, or depressed may not feel like drinking water. These feelings can leave them feeling nauseated or just uninterested.
Unclean water bowl: If your dog’s water bowl hasn’t been cleaned lately, a sticky biofilm of bacteria and food particles can cling to the sides of the bowl. This can cause the water to smell and taste unappealing.
Thoroughly wash your dog’s bowl each day and put it through the dishwasher weekly. Have spare bowls ready to replace when one is dirty.
Water is critical to a dog’s survival.
Without a consistent source of water, dogs become dehydrated, which is a serious concern. When this occurs, their bodies are not receiving the amount of fluid they need to carry out normal body functions, such as urinating and defecating.
If left untreated, dehydration can become severe, which is considered a medical emergency. If left untreated, severe dehydration can be fatal.
If a dog is not drinking water but is still eating, he may still be receiving some fluids depending on his diet. Canned food has a high moisture content, so dogs may not need to drink as much as when their diet consists of kibble.
Any major decrease in water consumption should be discussed immediately with your veterinarian, especially when present alongside other concerning symptoms, including:
Lethargy
Weight loss
Dry gums
Vomiting
Pet parents should call their veterinarian if they notice their dog is drinking less water, even if there are no major changes in their environment that may be suspected as the cause.
Your veterinarian will give you next steps, which may include monitoring at home or bringing in your dog for an exam.
If a pet parent notices a decreased water intake—as well as dry gums, sunken eyes, lethargy, or weakness—they should contact their veterinarian as soon as possible.
These are signs of dehydration, which should be treated immediately.
If a dog is not drinking water, the veterinarian will do a thorough physical exam and testing to determine the underlying cause. This may include blood work, urinalysis, and imaging (X-rays or ultrasound).
If there is a specific underlying illness, your veterinarian will treat the condition and your dog’s water intake should go back to normal.
Treatment may consist of any of the following, depending on the underlying cause:
Diet change
Anti-nausea medications, such as Cerenia®
Antacids, such as famotidine
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories, such as Galliprant®
Fluid therapy (may be given under the skin or through the vein)
Hospitalization and supportive care (in severe cases)
Oral exam and dental cleaning
If your dog is otherwise acting normally and you veterinarian has no major concerns after their exam and testing, pet parents can try enticing their dog to drink more water at home by doing the following:
Thoroughly cleaning the water bowl daily
Adding a tablespoon of unsalted chicken broth to the water bowl
Using a water fountain instead of a bowl
Offering canned food rather than kibble
If your dog will not drink water, he should be brought to a veterinarian for fluid therapy as soon as possible. A veterinarian can administer fluids underneath the skin or by vein to help rehydrate, as well as determine the underlying cause.
Pet parents should never force-feed water to a dog who is not drinking. A veterinarian can offer tips and tricks (like adding unsalted chicken broth to the dog’s water) once underlying illness has been ruled out.
Dogs receive some water from their diets. This is especially true for those fed canned food. Therefore, it is possible for a dog to continue peeing even if he is not drinking water.
Additionally, a dog’s body still needs to remove toxins from the bloodstream by producing urine, but if he is not drinking, his urine will just be highly concentrated and present in small amounts. 
Generally, it becomes an emergency if a dog goes three to four days without water.
Dogs who do not drink water for this length of time will become severely dehydrated, which can result in death if not promptly treated. Always contact your veterinarian with any questions if your dog is not drinking enough, or not at all.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Brittany Kleszynski is a veterinarian and freelance medical writer who specializes in creating meaningful content that engages readers...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.