Teamjackson/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
A limping dog is reluctant to put weight on one or more legs, usually due to pain. As a result, they have more difficulty walking. Seeing your dog limping can be scary and concerning.
Limping may be short-lived—sometimes a dog may limp for a few moments and then be fine. A dog may have a long-term or progressively worsening limp. In other cases, a dog may limp on and off intermittently. Occasionally, the limp may appear to shift between legs.
Although some causes of limping are obvious, it’s not always easy to determine what’s causing the problem. Limping in dogs is never normal, but some of its associated health problems are more serious than others.
Let’s look at everything you need to know about dog limping and what you can do to help your pup recover.
Health Tools
Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.

Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.
Several injuries and conditions can lead to lameness in dogs.
A few common causes of dog limping include:
Bone fractures
Injuries of tendons or ligaments, such as cranial cruciate ligament rupture 
Muscle strains
Wounds or bruising of the limb or paws
Joint dislocations
Insect bites and stings
Torn nails
Imbedded foreign material in the paw
Bacterial or fungal infections of soft tissues, bones, or joints
Developmental disorders, such as:
Elbow dysplasia
Hip dysplasia
Patellar luxation
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of the shoulder joint
Autoimmune disorders, such as autoimmune or immune-mediated polyarthritis (IMPA)
Degenerative joint disease (also known as osteoarthritis)
Tick-borne diseases
Cancer affecting soft tissues, bones, or joints
Damage to or illness that affects the nervous system
This is not an all-inclusive list for causes of limping. Your veterinarian can help you determine what is causing your pet’s limp.


There are a few different types of lameness in dogs.
By definition, a chronic limp has been present for two weeks or more.
Perhaps your dog’s limp was barely noticeable a few weeks ago, but now it’s more obvious.
Or maybe you thought your dog’s limp would go away with rest, but it hasn’t.
If your dog’s limping hasn’t resolved within a few days, it’s time for a veterinarian to figure out what’s going on.
A chronic limp is almost never an emergency, but you should make the appointment as soon as possible to get your dog some relief.
If your dog has just started limping, this is called an acute limp. If this is the case, you need to figure out if your dog's limping is mild or severe.
A mild limp means your dog is still using the leg but not putting as much weight on it.
If your dog has just developed a mild limp but appears comfortable and healthy in all other ways, it’s not unreasonable to encourage them to take it easy for a few days and see what happens. This usually entails strict cage rest with just outside potty breaks.
If your dog doesn’t start improving quickly, the limping worsens, or your pet isn’t back to normal in a few days, make an appointment with your veterinarian.
When severely limping, dogs may refuse to bear weight on the affected limb, or they may just barely tap their toes on the ground.
While severe dog limping should be evaluated by a veterinarian quickly, you should take your dog’s personality into account.
Some dogs will avoid bearing any weight on a mildly sore limb while others are stoic and will walk almost normally even though they’re in a lot of pain.
This will help you determine if your dog’s severe limp warrants a trip to the emergency clinic or if you can wait to see your regular veterinarian as soon as possible.
Evaluate your dog’s well-being. Is your dog displaying other signs of pain?
If your pup is showing the following symptoms, take them to the vet right away.
Vocalization (yelping or whining)
Trembling
Behavior changes (like hiding, unwillingness to move, fear, or reactivity)
Bleeding
An obvious fracture or dislocation
Limb dragging
Swelling of the limb
Lethargy
Disorientation
Vomiting
Trouble breathing
If your dog is limping, you should first assess the severity of the situation.
If your dog’s limp is new and mild and they have no other signs, it’s okay to rest them for a few days to see if the signs improve.
Do not give your dog any over-the-counter (OTC) or human pain relievers or muscle relaxers.
If your pup has been limping for several days with no improvement, then it’s time to call your veterinarian.
If your dog has other symptoms—such as those listed above—contact your veterinarian right away.
If there are no other signs, make sure to evaluate the bottom of your pet’s foot. Occasionally, things like gum, rocks, or cockleburs can get stuck to the bottom of your pet’s foot or between toes, resulting in what looks like a dramatic limp.  
Keep in mind that limping generally means your dog is experiencing pain. Even in mild cases, contacting your veterinarian is the best way to get pain relief for your dog. A lot of dogs hide their limp in the veterinary office, so consider taking a video of your dog limping to show your veterinarian.
When resting your dog, keep them from running, jumping, or rough housing. You should take them out on a leash to eliminate.
Vets will diagnose lameness in dogs by taking a thorough health history.
Be prepared to answer the following questions:
How long has your dog been limping?
Can you identify a specific event that may have initiated the limp?
Does the limp come and go, or is it present all the time?
What type of treatment have you tried at home? Has it worked?
Have you noticed any other changes to your dog’s health or behavior?
Does your dog have any underlying conditions that could make the limp worse or even caused it, like arthritis, hip dysplasia, or patellar luxation?
Next, the veterinarian will perform a physical exam that includes:
Watching your pet walk to determine if there are gait abnormalities
Moving the joints through their normal range of motion
Palpating (examining by touch) along the back, limbs, joints, and paws for pain or abnormalities
Checking your pet’s reflexes and proprioception (awareness of limb position)
X-rays are often needed to reach a diagnosis. Some cases also benefit from blood work, a CT scan, an MRI, a joint fluid analysis, or other laboratory tests.
The veterinarian will then make treatment recommendations based on your dog’s diagnosis and overall health. In some cases, pain relief and rest may be all that is needed.
Veterinarians often prescribe nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for pain. These medications are safer for dogs than those designed for human use
Medications may include:
Galliprant®: Galliprant® (active ingredient grapiprant) is a prescription NSAID used in the management of pain and inflammation associated with osteoarthritis in dogs.
Carprofen: Carprofen is a prescription NSAID used in dogs to reduce pain and inflammation, typically due to osteoarthritis and pain following surgery.
Carprofen is the drug’s generic name. Brand names include Rimadyl® and Carprieve®.
Deramaxx™: Deramaxx™ (active ingredient deracoxib) is a prescription NSAID used primarily for the treatment of post-operative pain and inflammation caused by orthopedic and general surgery.
It’s also used to treat inflammation associated with arthritis, and may also be used to control fevers and inflammation caused by other conditions.
When joint health is in question, many veterinarians also recommend the use of nutritional supplements such as:
Glucosamine
Chondroitin sulfate
Omega-3 fatty acids
Green-lipped mussels
Methylsulfonylmethane (MSM)
Avocado soybean unsaponifiables (ASU)
Common supplements vets may recommend include Nutramax® Dasuquin®, and Nutramax® Cosequin.
If your pup’s limp is caused by something else, other treatment recommendations may include:
Additional medications to manage pain, reduce inflammation, treat infection, and/or suppress the immune system
Bandages, splints, braces, or casts
Surgery
Chemotherapy or radiotherapy for cancer
Acupuncture
Physical therapy
Stem cell therapy
Cold laser treatments
Neuromuscular electrical stimulation
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
Therapeutic ultrasound
Extracorporeal shockwave therapy
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy
The use of assistive devices like harnesses, slings, prosthetic limbs, or wheelchairs
Weight management
You and your veterinarian are a team. Working together, you can design a treatment plan that will soon help your dog feel better.
Some causes of limping will recover quickly with rest and pain medications. If your pet has had surgery or more advanced treatments, your veterinarian will likely discuss activity restriction and how to slowly increase your pet’s activity back to normal.
When resting your pet, you should prevent running, jumping, and rough play. Leash walks can help keep your pet safe when they go outside. In some cases, you may need to use a sling or harness to help your pet with mobility.
Consider purchasing soft orthopedic beds to keep your pet comfortable. You could also get small sets of stairs or ramps to help your dog get around more easily.
Accidents happen, and not all causes of limping in dogs are preventable. Steps you can take to help protect your pet include:
Keeping them on a leash when not in the fenced yard
Keeping your pet up to date on their preventives can protect them from tick-borne illnesses that cause limping
Getting regular wellness exams to catch health conditions early
Keeping your pet at a healthy weight
Trimming your dog’s nails every two to four weeks
Not all causes of limping require an immediate trip to the emergency room.
However, resting your pup and evaluating them for any trauma or wounds is a recommended first step. 
If your dog is in pain with any of the symptoms listed above or acutely lame, then have him evaluated by a veterinarian as soon as possible.
If your dog is limping but actively crying or whining, he still could be in pain.
The reason could be less severe or they’re simply trying to hide the pain, but they should still be examined by the veterinarian.
If your dog is actively in pain or is showing any symptoms of those listed above, take her right away to the vet. 
If those symptoms are not present or she seems generally fine otherwise, call your vet to get her in as soon as possible. 
Some causes of limping may go away with just a little TLC, but it’s always best to have her evaluated than taking a “wait and see” approach. 
Do not attempt to give her any medications while waiting to get her examined. 
Limping in dogs can last for several days or weeks for most causes although some dogs may have an intermittent limp for life; the timing is variable and ultimately depends on the underlying cause. 
If your dog is limping, it’s best to have him checked by the vet.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Jennifer Coates is an accomplished veterinarian, writer, editor, and consultant with years of experience in the fields of veterinary...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.