ChristopherBernard/iStock/Getty Images Plus via Getty Images via Getty Images
A dog not eating or eating less than usual isn’t always a sign that something is wrong. However, as a good pet parent, you want to rule out any underlying conditions.
Your dog’s appetite is regulated by a complex mechanism that involves the brain, the fullness and distention of stomach and intestines, and specific hormones.
Appetite can be altered by medical conditions, behavioral conditions, environmental changes, or issues with the food itself.
When a dog has no appetite and isn’t eating food, this is called anorexia. Anorexia in dogs is not the same as anorexia nervosa in humans.
Hyporexia is when the dog has a decreased appetite but still eats some food. If your dog has a normal appetite but is physically unable to eat, this is called pseudoanorexia.
When your dog isn’t eating, your veterinarian must differentiate between conditions causing a lack of appetite and conditions causing an inability to eat.
Most adult dogs can go three to five days without eating as long as they’re still drinking water. However, this doesn’t mean you should sit idle while your dog isn’t eating for several days. If your adult dog hasn’t eaten in the past two days—even if he is otherwise acting normal—contact your veterinarian. 
If your diabetic dog is skipping any meals, contact your veterinarian immediately. This lack of food intake may adversely affect your dog’s response to insulin and serious consequences can develop.
Health Tools
Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.

Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.
Let’s look at a few reasons why your dog may not be eating.
There are several medical conditions that could decrease your dog’s food consumption.
Some medical conditions that could cause anorexia or hyporexia in dogs include:
Gastrointestinal disease—Parvovirus, dietary indiscretion causing stomach upset, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), stomach ulcers, or constipation
Obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract—Foreign object obstruction such as a toy ball stuck in the stomach
Organ dysfunction and systemic illness—Kidney failure, diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), liver disease or hepatitis, or pancreatitis
Dental disease—Periodontal disease or fractured teeth
Tumors or cancer—Masses specifically related to the gastrointestinal tract (in the mouth or back of the throat, stomach, or intestines), or lymphoma. However, any type of cancer in dogs can negatively affect a pup’s appetite.
Orthopedic—Arthritis makes it difficult for a dog to lower their head to the food bowl. Hip dysplasia can cause pain in dogs when they walk to the food bowl.
Medications/toxins—Many side effects of medications—either over the counter (OTC) or prescribed—can lead to a decreased appetite.
Dogs can experience similar emotions and phobias as humans. Examples of behavioral causes for decreased appetite may include:
Stress
Fear
Anxiety, including generalized anxiety and separation anxiety
Phobias
Cognitive decline in senior dogs
If your dog has severe behavioral concerns that affecting his eating, contact your vet. For some dogs, medications like fluoxetine or trazodone may be necessary to help manage their condition.
 In the meantime, you can support your pet by:
Avoiding any obvious triggers for their anxiety
Providing him with a safe space, such as a comfortable but secluded room or crate (if previously accustomed to) when visitors are present
Using calming pheromones
Ensuring he’s getting plenty of exercise
Supplying toys or activities that provide mental stimulation like food puzzles and nose work
Make introductions to new pets and children slowly
Reduce the movement of their food and water bowls so there is routine and consistency
Environmental changes play into your pet’s emotional well-being. Significant changes to the home environment can cause stress and anxiety, which in turn affect appetite.
This includes:
Moving to a new home
Adding a new pet or new child
Having houseguests
Construction in the home
Rearranging the furniture
Moving food and water bowls
Healthy senior dogs have a lower calorie requirement than younger pups, so you may notice a slight decrease in appetite as your dog gets older. 
However, age is not a reason for a dog to become anorexic. A significant change in your senior dog’s appetite is a reason to contact your veterinarian.
When supporting your senior dog’s appetite at home, consider:
Using a raised food bowl if he’s having trouble reaching the food
Place a nonslip mat around the bowls to avoid falls
Offer softer foods so he can easily chew
Feeding at consistently scheduled times of day to help with cognitive decline
If your dog has routinely eaten the same food and now shows no interest in it, make sure to check for the following:
Is the food moldy or expired?
Is the food wet?
Did you get the right flavor?
Any time you change a dog’s diet, it should be done gradually over several days to weeks to avoid upsetting their stomach, which can lead to a decreased appetite. 
Double check that your dog isn’t being fed by anyone else in the home.
Also, be sure that your pup isn’t being fed too many treats—which includes human food—as he may hold out on his regular diet or be full by the time meals are given. 
As a rule, dog treats should make up no more than 10% of your pup’s calories.
ADVERTISEMENT
A few things you could try to help motivate your dog to eat include:
Warming the food
Offering a more palatable or different flavor of food
Adding a food topper
Offering for a short term boiled rice and chicken (without spices or seasonings)
Treats can also be enticing and may help coax your dog to eat.
If your dog has any chronic medical condition such as diabetes, food allergies, or kidney disease, be sure to speak with your veterinarian prior to changing your dog’s food.
Make sure to consider whether your dog is experiencing any stressors; if noted, take steps to minimize them or prevent them altogether.
Additionally, your veterinarian may prescribe a short course of an appetite stimulant, such as mirtazapine or Entyce™ (capromorelin). 
Other drugs, such as Cerenia® (maropitant) or onansetron, can be beneficial for nausea which can contributed to your dog’s poor appetite.
If you’re noticing a decreased appetite but your dog seems otherwise healthy, contact your veterinarian for an appointment.
If your dog is also vomiting or having diarrhea, acting lethargic, has a tense or distended abdomen, or yelps when their abdomen is touched, contact an emergency vet for guidance.
If your dog remains uninterested in food, especially if it persists over a couple of days, contact your veterinarian for an evaluation. If your dog has known chronic medical condition like diabetes or is a puppy, contact your veterinarian immediately as these pets cannot go as long without food.
If your dog has no appetite but is drinking excessive amounts of water, this may be a reason to seek emergency attention.
For example, he could be experiencing diabetic ketoacidosis. At a minimum, call your veterinarian for advice.
Puppies can’t go as long as adult dogs without food. 
If your puppy is skipping meals, contact your veterinarian. 
If this is accompanied by other symptoms like vomiting and/or diarrhea, the number one issue to rule out in a puppy would be parvovirus. Emergency care is required for severe symptoms.
Prolonged absence of food can have a negative effect on all body systems.
Going without food longer than three days can lead to damaging effects to the gastrointestinal tract and organs. 
However, it’s recommended that your dog be evaluated by a vet much sooner than this too avoid the harmful and potentially irreversible effects—including death—that can occur.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Rhiannon Koehler is a veterinarian and freelance medical writer. She received her Doctor of Veterinary Medicine and Master of Public...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.