iStock/FatCamera
Today, pudgy pups are becoming the norm in many U.S. households. According to the Association for Pet Obesity Prevention (APOP), an estimated 59% of dogs are overweight or obese.
Because obesity in dogs is associated with a host of medical ailments—from diabetes and osteoarthritis to heart disease and cancer—it’s important to find the best dog food for weight loss to complement your pet’s weight-loss plan.
Prescription weight-loss diets are incredibly effective in the battle of the bulge. Several components to look for in the best diet dog food include:
Nutrient and caloric density
High fiber, low fat
L-carnitine levels
Antioxidants
The value of choosing a prescription (or therapeutic) diet for weight loss is related to two factors:
Calories in a set serving of dog food
Nutrients in that same serving
Therapeutic diets for weight loss are designed to decrease caloric intake (so weight loss occurs) while also maintaining appropriate nutrient levels and do not cause nutritional deficiencies.
If you simply feed less of a regular or weight maintenance food, your dog may not get the necessary nutrients, as these diets are nutritionally complete based upon a regular-sized portion, not a diet-sized portion.
Diets higher in fiber and lower in fat promote satiety (a feeling of fullness) while still having a lower caloric density than regular dog foods. Dietary fiber can’t be digested, so it adds no calories to a dog’s diet.
Weight-loss foods tend to contain sources of both soluble and insoluble fiber.
Insoluble fibers do not dissolve, are not changed by the digestion process, have less calories, and help a dog feel full. They are used to increase stool frequency and volume.
Soluble fibers do dissolve, so they pull water into the digestive tract and slow digestion.
This balanced combination promotes weight loss without leading to unpleasant side effects like dramatically increased poop production or a dog food that tastes bad.
Dietary fat is the most calorie-dense nutrient, containing more than twice the number of calories per gram in comparison to proteins and carbohydrates. So, it makes sense to limit the amount of fat in dog foods designed to promote weight loss.  
L-carnitine is an amino acid that helps move more fatty acids into cells so they can be burned for energy. This helps dogs move and metabolize fat instead of storing it.
Look for L-carnitine in the dog food’s ingredient list. It may also be listed under the “Guaranteed Analysis” section of the food label. 
Diets formulated for weight loss are often enriched with antioxidants that neutralize free radicals that damage cells. Many of these antioxidants also have an anti-inflammatory action. This can benefit dogs who are overweight because they tend to experience more inflammation than slimmer dogs do.
If you’re looking for a weight loss food for your dog, ask your veterinarian about the options below. They can direct you to a food that’s best for your specific pet.
Weight loss happens when the calories your dog is taking in (through food and treats) are less than the calories expended (through exercise and maintenance needs). Pet parents are responsible for what dogs eat and have control over the calories they take in.
To get your dog on a weight-loss diet, you’ll need to schedule an appointment with your veterinarian. The vet will determine your dog’s target weight, calculate their recommended calorie intake, choose the best dog food for weight loss, establish a feeding routine, and work toward reaching their target weight.
A veterinarian will also rule out any underlying medical conditions that could be causing weight gain in your dog, such as hypothyroidism or Cushing’s disease.
For otherwise healthy dogs, most veterinarians will calculate the calories your dog needs with a maximum goal of losing 2% of initial body weight per week. Depending on a number of factors, a loss of 0.5% of initial body weight per week can be used as the minimum desired rate of weight loss.
Your veterinarian will also determine your dog’s target weight and the amount of time needed to reach this goal. They can suggest the best dog food for weight loss, explain ways to determine how much to feed your dog, and schedule regular weigh-ins.
Often, the weigh-ins will be scheduled every two weeks for the first two months of weight loss. Your dog’s diet will be adjusted based on how they’re doing.
Once your dog’s target weight is achieved, a new feeding plan will be initiated with the best weight-management dog food to stabilize your dog’s body weight.
It’s important for you to work with your veterinarian to create a feeding routine that keeps your pup feeling full while also on track with their weight-loss plan. Here are a few tips you can follow to help your dog hit their weight-loss goals:
Measure out the exact amount of food as directed by your veterinarian
Feed your dog several smaller meals throughout the day instead of feeding free-choice or just one or two large meals
Do not allow access to other pets’ food or human food
Limit treats and stick to vet-approved treats
Some vet-approved, low-calorie treats include:
Carrot slices
Green beans
Small amounts of cooked, plain, lean meat, such as chicken
Packaged low-calorie treats
Broccoli
Remember that treats, even low-calorie treats, should only make up 10% of your dog’s daily calorie intake. The other 90% must come from a balanced dog food.
Controlling food and calories is the most important part of a dog’s weight-loss routine, but the process can be helped along by burning calories. 
Talk with your veterinarian about your dog’s unique capabilities and needs before starting a new exercise routine. At your dog’s weigh-ins, your vet will adjust their diet and exercise routine to ideally result in a rate of 1–2% body weight loss per week.
Many dogs lose weight in a stair-step fashion, losing quite a bit over a two-week period and then not losing much over the next two weeks. Major alterations in diet plans are not usually done unless weight has not changed at two sequential examinations.
After your dog reaches their target weight, their body weight should be monitored monthly to ensure that the ideal weight is maintained.
Your vet can give you a recommendation on the best dog food going forward. A lot of dogs will need to stay on their same weight loss diet, but at increased portion sizes so the weight loss doesn’t continue. Work closely with your vet to ensure your dog is staying at a healthy weight.
And remember: Even after the diet is over, approved treats should still only comprise less than 10% of your dog’s total caloric intake.
Dogs can lose weight on either wet food or dry food as long as they are being fed the appropriate amount of calories.
Every dog is different, so there are many factors that determine this. Work with your veterinarian to learn how many calories you dog needs to eat every day.
You should consider a weight loss diet if you notice your dog’s collar or harness seems snug, if your dog has less energy, if your dog pants when they walk or doesn’t seem to be able to exercise like they used to. Schedule a checkup if you notice any of these signs; a vet will examine your dog and let you know if a weight loss dog food is needed.
 Fiber Frustrations – Petfoodology. Published November 4, 2019. 
Baldwin K, Bartges J, Buffington T, et al. AAHA Nutritional Assessment Guidelines for Dogs and Cats. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association. 2010.
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines. AAHA. Published June 21, 2021.

Fiber Frustrations – Petfoodology. Published November 4, 2019. 
Baldwin K, Bartges J, Buffington T, et al. AAHA Nutritional Assessment Guidelines for Dogs and Cats. Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association. 2010.
2021 AAHA Nutrition and Weight Management Guidelines. AAHA. Published June 21, 2021.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.