Bratislav Stefanovic/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
Dogs are omnivorous, which means that they can digest both animal and plant materials. So, you might wonder: Can dogs eat fruit? And if so, which fruits can dogs eat?
Check out this list to see which fruits are safe and ask your veterinarian before supplementing your pet’s diet. Dogs dealing with obesity, diabetes, bladder stones, and other conditions should not be fed fruit without consulting your veterinarian first.
Here are some dog-friendly fruits, plus some fruits you should never feed your dog.
It depends. Dogs can safely eat some fruits, but others are toxic to them. Due to the balanced nature of high-quality, nutritionally complete commercial diets, it’s not necessary to supplement your dog’s diet with fruits, but it can be fun to use them as treats.
Most dogs love apples, which are safe and healthy for them to eat and contain many nutritional benefits like vitamins A and C, fiber, potassium, and antioxidants. Apples are also low in calories.
Always remove the stem, leaves, core, and seeds before feeding an apple to your dog. You should also cut the apple into small pieces to avoid potential choking or intestinal blockages.
Although dogs can eat bananas, they should not be given banana peels, as these are difficult to digest and could cause intestinal blockage.
Bananas are high in fiber, potassium, and vitamins B6 and C. However, they are also higher in sugar than many other fruits, so they should be given sparingly. Always cut bananas into small, bite-size pieces.
Yes, dogs can eat blackberries in moderation. Berries are packed with antioxidants and phytochemicals, which are chemical compounds in plants that have been found to help fight cancer in humans. They are also low in sugar and calories.
But blackberries also contain small amounts of naturally occurring xylitol, which is highly toxic to dogs. That said, your dog would have to eat a huge amount of blackberries to experience any adverse effects. A small handful of blackberries (depending on the size and health of your pup) a week should be OK.
Blueberries are low in calories and high in vitamin C, fiber, antioxidants, and phytochemicals. These berries can be a great snack for your dog as a food topper.
Cantaloupe is a healthy and nutritious fruit for dogs to eat. It’s high in fiber, low in calories, and contains numerous vitamins and minerals, including vitamins A and C, folate, fiber, and potassium. Cantaloupe is also 90% water, so it’s great for hydration.
Just watch out for the high sugar content—especially if your dog struggles with diabetes or obesity. Remember to always remove the rind and seeds before feeding cantaloupe to your dog.
Cranberries are a great snack for dogs. They are not only safe, but cranberries are considered a superfood for humans because they’re high in fiber and antioxidants. They also contain vitamins C, E, K, B1, and B2, plus manganese and copper.
Dried cranberries are a safe treat for pups, too. Just be aware that the amount of sugar per ounce is more concentrated when a fruit is dehydrated. Know that store-bought dried cranberries often have added sugars, preservatives, or even xylitol, an artificial sweetener that’s toxic to dogs. It’s best to dry cranberries with a dehydrator at home.
Honeydew is safe and healthy for dogs to eat. It contains vitamin C, potassium, and fiber, and it’s low in calories. And much like cantaloupe, honeydew contains a high percentage of water, so it’s great for hydration.
Always remove the rind and seeds before feeding honeydew to your dog to avoid any potential choking hazards or intestinal blockages.
Mangoes are also high in sugar and should only be fed to dogs in moderation. However, they are high in many nutritional benefits like fiber, potassium, and vitamins A, B6, C, and E as well.
Be sure to remove the mango seed and cut it into small pieces when feeding this fruit to your dog.
Oranges are a safe and healthy treat for dogs to eat. They are a great source of vitamin C, potassium, and fiber. And while most dogs love the sweet taste, some dogs don’t like the acidity of citrus fruits.
Oranges are not a good choice for dogs who experience obesity or diabetes because of the high sugar content. Eating too many oranges can give any dog an upset stomach from the high acidity and sugar levels, so be sure to feed oranges as an occasional treat in small portions.
Yes, peaches are a great snack for dogs—but again, in moderation. They are filled with health benefits like fiber and antioxidants while being low in calories and fat. However, peaches also have high sugar content.
You’ll need to remove the stem, leaves, and pit before feeding peaches to your dog. The peach pit—or stone—can be a dangerous choking hazard or even cause an intestinal blockage.
Dogs can safely eat pears, which contain health benefits like fiber, copper, and vitamins C and K. But before you feed any pears to your pup, remove the stem, leaves, pit, and seeds. Any of these could become choking hazards.
Avoid feeding canned pears to your dog, as they often contain added sugars.
Pineapples are good for hydration and are packed with antioxidants and vitamins. This fruit is great for supporting your dog’s immune and digestive systems, but some dogs may not like pineapples because of the strong acidity.
Keep in mind that the high sugar content and acidity can upset your dog’s stomach in large amounts. Plus, large amounts of sugar over time can lead to health issues, including obesity or diabetes. 
Like blackberries, dogs can eat raspberries safely on occasion. But because they’re high in sugar, limit the amount of berries to avoid gastrointestinal upset.
Strawberries are a good source of vitamin C, potassium, fiber, and antioxidants. As with other fruits, they should be cut into small pieces to avoid choking. Strawberries can also be mashed or pureed for very small dogs.
Tomatoes are not toxic to dogs, despite a popular myth that says otherwise. While you shouldn’t let your pup eat the stems or leaves of a tomato plant (which can be bad for dogs), a picked, ripe tomato is totally fine and can be a good source of potassium, antioxidants, and vitamin A and C.
Yes, dogs can eat watermelon. But the watermelon rinds and seeds (even the pale seeds) should be removed before giving the fruit to your dog, as they can cause choking or an intestinal blockage.
Watermelon is mostly water, so it’s a great treat for hot days. It can help keep your dog hydrated and is refreshing when frozen. Watermelon is also a good source of vitamins A, B6, and C, as well as potassium.
Don’t assume all fruits are safe for your dog. Here are some to avoid.
Although avocado flesh is not toxic to dogs, it’s also high in fat and can cause pancreatitis in dogs. The pit is also a choking hazard.
Never feed grapes or raisins to your dog. They may be toxic to some dogs, even in small amounts. But there is no way of knowing how your dog will react beforehand.
If your dog has eaten any grapes or raisins, contact your veterinarian immediately and take your dog to the vet’s office or an emergency vet. Time is of the essence when it comes to treatment for grape toxicity.
Never feed your dog wild berries, as they can be easily misidentified and many are toxic to dogs.
Treats should make up no more than 10% of your dog’s diet—this includes fruit. If you are giving your dog fruit in addition to other dog treats, make sure that you do not exceed this 10% recommendation.
The specific amount of fruit, or any treat, your dog can have varies based on your dog’s size and health. Talk to your veterinarian for guidance.
Even if a fruit isn’t toxic to dogs, too much of anything can give your dog an upset stomach. Some dogs are more sensitive than others and can experience gastrointestinal distress even if given a small amount of fruit. Keep an eye out for the typical symptoms of an upset stomach:
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Decreased appetite or loss of appetite
Fatigue
Acting depressed
Looking uncomfortable
Lip-licking
Flatulence (gas)
If you do notice any of the signs of GI upset, stop feeding your dog any fruit and call your veterinarian.
Wash fruit thoroughly before feeding it to your dog. Remove any leaves, stems, seeds, pits, or rinds. Cut the fruit into small, bit-sized pieces and give your dog a small amount. Canned fruit in syrup should never be given due to the high sugar content.
Pieces of fruit can be given as individual treats or mashed up and added to your dog’s meals. Remember that fruit can be a choking hazard, especially for small dogs, so always monitor your pup while they’re eating.
No, dogs should not eat fruit snacks. While fruit snacks are not considered toxic to dogs, they are very high in sugar and best avoided.
Just like fruits, some vegetables are safe for dogs in moderation while others should be off-limits.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Ellen Malmanger is originally from Arkansas, but attended Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine for veterinary school....
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.