Do you know what you would do if your dog ate some chocolate? What if your cat had a seizure? What if your pet was overheating on a hot summer day, or fell down the stairs and started limping?
Knowing some basic first aid information and being prepared for emergencies can help you avoid the feelings of panic that may accompany these situations. First aid care is not a substitute for veterinary care, but it may save your pet’s life until you can get them veterinary care. In case of an emergency, call your veterinarian or local veterinary emergency hospital so they can be ready when you arrive.
When traveling with your pet, consider bringing a simpler, travel-sized version of the pet first aid kit you keep at home, and have the phone numbers of your veterinarian, the national animal poison control hotline (888-426-4235), and a 24-hour emergency veterinary hospital in the area where you will be visiting.
When traveling without your pet, be sure to consider who's in charge while you're away and what they'll need to keep your pet safe and healthy. 
An injury may not only cause your pet pain, but also fear and confusion. These things can make even the gentlest of pets unpredictable or even dangerous. To protect you both:
Remember: Any first aid administered to your pet should be followed by immediate veterinary care. First aid care is not a substitute for veterinary care, but it may save your pet's life until it receives veterinary treatment.
Keep first aid information on hand, whether at home or in the clinic.
Download
Also in Spanish: Primeros Auxilios para Mascotas
Poisoning is a pet emergency that causes a great deal of confusion for pet owners. In general, any products that are harmful for people are also harmful for pets. Examples include cleaning products, rodent poisons, and antifreeze. But you also need to be aware of common food items, plants, and other substances that may be harmful to your pet. See common household hazards that may pose a danger to your pet
If your pet's skin or eyes are exposed to a toxic product (such as many cleaning products), check the product label for the instructions for people exposed to the product.
If you know your pet has swallowed or had contact with something that may be harmful, or if the animal is having seizures, losing consciousness, unconscious, or having difficulty breathing, call your veterinarian, emergency veterinary clinic, the Animal Poison Control Center hotline (888-426-4435), or Pet Poison Helpline (855-764-7661) immediately. A consultation fee may apply for hotline/helpline calls.
If possible, have the following information available:
Collect any material your pet may have vomited or chewed, and place it in a plastic sealable bag to take with you when you bring your animal in for veterinary treatment.
Signs of internal bleeding include bleeding from nose, mouth, or rectum; coughing up blood; bloody urine; pale gums; collapse; and a weak and rapid pulse.
Use a clean cloth or towel to apply firm pressure directly over the bleeding site.
Eye injuries are painful and can quickly worsen, becoming a threat to your pet’s sight.
Signs of heatstroke include rapid breathing/heavy panting, excessive drooling, weakness or drowsiness, confusion, vomiting or diarrhea, and abnormally colored, dry or sticky gums.
Signs of shock include a weak pulse, shallow breathing, nervousness, and dazed eyes. This usually follows severe injury or extreme fright.
Choking pets have difficulty breathing, paw a lot at their mouths, make choking sounds when breathing or coughing, and may have blue-tinged lips and/or tongue.
 
Keep a kit of basic first aid supplies for the pets in your household. Many items in a family first aid kit can be used for pets, too. Your veterinarian may recommend additional items for your kit based on your pet’s medical condition.
Be prepared to take care of pets and other animals, especially during disasters such as fire, flood, or other emergencies.
Be prepared
Download emergency contact cards for pets and livestock.
Download