Many of us enjoy taking our pets with us in the car or truck. But did you know that doing so can threaten our pet's safety—and even our own—if we don't take appropriate precautions? Two behaviors are especially risky: leaving pets in vehicles, and allowing them to be loose when driving.
Temperature fluctuations can make it dangerous to leave your pet unattended in your car.
Your vehicle can quickly reach a temperature that puts your pet at risk of serious illness or death—even on a day that doesn't seem that hot, and even if the car is left in the shade. And cracking the windows makes no difference.
The numbers back it up. Research on vehicle safety for children indicates that the temperature inside your vehicle can rise about 20 degrees Fahrenheit in just 10 minutes, and almost 30 degrees in 20 minutes. The longer you wait, the higher the temperature climbs. At one hour, your vehicle's interior temperature can be more than 40 degrees higher than the outside temperature. Even on a 70-degree day, that's more than 110 degrees inside your vehicle!
See a more detailed table
Cold weather can also threaten pets left in vehicles. Remember: leaving a pet in a vehicle on a chilly day isn't much better than leaving them outdoors. Pets that are young, old, ill, or thin are particularly susceptible to cold environments and should never be left in cold cars.
The dangers to pets in cars don't stop with temperatures. Just as we should always wear seatbelts to protect ourselves in case of a traffic accident, so should our pets always be properly restrained. This means using an appropriate safety harness, crate, or carrier to keep them—and you—safe. And you shouldn't drive a pickup truck with a pet loose in the truck bed.
Here are a few risks posed by loose pets while you're driving:
Pickup trucks pose an extra risk. Driving with your dog unrestrained in the bed of a pickup truck is not only dangerous, it's also illegal in many states. Besides potential injury from airborne debris, dogs can fall or jump from the truck bed and be injured or killed on impact, or be struck by other traffic. Although using an appropriate-length tether might seem like a good remedy, the tether could tangle, injure, or even choke your dog.
Another risky venture is allowing your dog to hang their head out of windows during a ride. We get it: this practice can be fun for you both. But fun can quickly lead to regret if your dog injures their head from flying debris, is thrown from the window on an abrupt turn or stop, or jumps from the window, risking injury to themselves and anyone who tries to catch them.
Share important information about vehicle temperatures and safety while traveling. Download our client-ready posters.
Download
Download
What to think about when deciding to travel with a pet? Can you take your pet out of the country? Specific needs for travel by plane, boat, car, train or bus?
Learn more
Our animal transport guide can help owners comply with the requirements for obtaining CVIs for all animal species.
Learn more
When considering interstate or international travel for your dog or cat, plan ahead because some preparations may need to start six months or more in advance.
Learn more
Warm weather poses health risks to pets, even on days that don’t seem that hot. Knowing the risks and being prepared can help keep pets safe.
Learn more