Disasters can vary widely in scale, severity, and impact. No matter where you live, disasters and emergencies can and will occur. By being prepared with a disaster plan, you are helping advance your safety, the safety of your animals, and that of first responders.
Being prepared means:
Remember: Bring all pets indoors at the first sign of a potential disaster situation so all pets are accounted for if you need to evacuate.
Find all these tips and more in AVMA's Save the Whole Family disaster preparedness guide (also in Spanish: Salvar a Toda la Familia).
Be prepared for a disaster with a pet evacuation kit. Assemble the kit well in advance of any emergency and store in an easy-to-carry, waterproof container close to an exit.
*These items must be rotated and replaced to ensure they don't expire
See all first aid kit tips.
Download a printable version of this checklist (also in Spanish: Kit de evacuación para mascotas).
Prepare your emergency contact list now, before disaster strikes. You may need it during a disaster or while evacuating, and rescue personnel responding to a disaster affecting your pets may need it, too. Keep a copy with your evacuation kit.
Include addresses and 24-hour contact numbers, if available. If you use the Medical ID function on your mobile device, be sure one of the contacts is aware of your pet disaster plan.
Download emergency contact cards for pets and livestock (Spanish and English)
AVMA resources help veterinary teams be prepared for any kind of emergency.
Get the full disaster preparedness guide for households with pets: Save the Whole Family.
Download

Also in Spanish: Salvar a Toda la Familia
Donate to the American Veterinary Medical Foundation (AVMF) to help support the veterinary teams who care for animals in disasters.
Donate now
Always remember that any first aid administered to your pet should be followed by immediate veterinary care. First aid care is not a substitute for veterinary care, but it may save your pet's life until it receives veterinary treatment.
Learn more
Smoke from wildfires and other large blazes affects pets, horses, livestock and wildlife. If you can see or feel the effects of smoke yourself, you also should take precautions to keep your animals—both pets and livestock—safe.
Learn more
There are unique considerations for horses and livestock during a disaster. Learn how to plan for disasters when you have horses or other animals on a small farm.
Learn more