What pet should you get? A cat? A dog? A hedgehog? And, of course, every kid wants a pony!
When you choose a pet, you accept responsibility for the health and welfare of another living thing. You’re making a promise to care for your pet for his/her entire life. You also become responsible for your pet’s impact on your family, friends and community.
Your pet-owning experience will be most enjoyable if you consider carefully what type of pet best suits your family, home, and lifestyle. Unfulfilled expectations are a leading reason why people give away, abandon, or give pets up for adoption, so invest the time and effort to make an informed decision and ensure the years with your future pet are happy ones.
When considering a pet that’s right for you and your family, consider the following:
If you’re not sure that a pet you’re considering is right for your family, talk to a veterinarian. Veterinarians can help you better understand a potential pet’s needs and how they may or may not be compatible with your family’s lifestyle.
Once you choose your pet, your veterinarian will help you provide the best care for your pet to ensure a healthy life. Regular veterinary exams and preventive care are critical to your pet’s health and welfare. Most owners are aware that dogs and cats need appropriate vaccinations and parasite control, but other species benefit from routine veterinary care too!
Wild animals should not be kept as pets. They are not domesticated and often do not behave in a manner that’s acceptable in a family home. Wild animals have specific needs that are difficult or impossible to meet in a home environment, and this can put their health and life at risk. In addition, they may pose a threat of disease for other pets and for human family members. Leave wild animals wild and appreciate them from afar, for your safety and theirs.
Responsible Pet Ownership
Guidelines for Responsible Pet Ownership (AVMA policy)
Selecting a Pet Bird   
Selecting a Pet Dog 
Selecting a Pet Cat
Selecting a Pet Rabbit
Selecting a Pet Rodent
Selecting a Pet Ferret
Selecting a Pet Horse
Selecting a Pet Fish
Selecting a Pet Reptile
Whether you are considering a pet bird or counseling someone who is, we have information and tips that will help.