Thanksgiving is a special holiday that brings together family and friends. It also can bring some hazards for pets. Follow these tips to keep your pets healthy and safe during the holiday.
Overindulging in the family feast can be unhealthy for humans, and even worse for pets. Fatty foods are hard for animals to digest. Poultry bones can damage your pet’s digestive tract. And holiday sweets can contain ingredients that are poisonous to pets.
If you’re hosting a party or overnight visitors, plan ahead to keep your pets safe and make the experience less stressful for everyone.
Whether you take your pet(s) with you or leave them behind, you can take steps to safeguard them when traveling for Thanksgiving or at any other time.
Your pet may need a health certificate from your veterinarian if you’re traveling across state lines or international borders, whether by air or car. Learn the requirements for any states  or countries you will visit or pass through, and schedule an appointment with your veterinarian to get the needed certificate within the timeframes required by those destinations.
Never leave pets alone in vehicles, even for a short time, regardless of the weather.
Always safely restrain pets in vehicles. This means using a secure harness or a carrier, placed in a location clear of airbags. Doing this:
Never transport your pet in the bed of a truck. Learn more about properly restraining pets in vehicles.
Talk with your veterinarian if you’re traveling by air and considering bringing your pet with you. Certain pets, such as short-nosed dogs and cats, may have difficulty with air travel. Your veterinarian is the best person to advise you regarding your own pet’s ability to travel.
Pack for your pet as well as yourself if you’re going to travel together. In addition to your pet’s food and medications, bring your pet’s medical records, information to help identify your pet if they become lost, first aid supplies, and other items. Refer to the Traveling with Your Pet FAQ for a more complete list.
Are you considering boarding your dog while you travel? Talk with your veterinarian to find out how best to protect your pet from canine flu and other contagious diseases, and to make sure your pet is up to date on vaccines.
Don’t forget to protect your family and loved ones from foodborne illnesses while cooking your Thanksgiving meal. Hand washing, and safe food handling and preparation, are important to make sure your holiday is a happy one. The U.S. Department of Agriculture offers tips for handling, thawing, and cooking turkey, as well as saving your leftovers.