Erika Lessa, CBST, CDBT, CDBC, CPDT-KA, Fear-Free Certified
Adobe Stock/Soloviova Liudmyla
“Should I keep the dog off the couch?” It’s a common question for dog trainers and behavior consultants, and there are different ideas about whether letting a dog on a couch is OK.
Many families invite their dog on the couch for a nap or movie night. Others are not comfortable with dogs on the furniture, and that’s OK, too.
Whatever your decision, everyone in the dog’s life must be on the same page, or it will be confusing for the dog and frustrating for you.
Ultimately, it comes down to personal preference. But there are pros and cons to letting your dog on your couch, bed, and other furniture.
Having the dog on the couch or in bed with you can be a wonderful bonding experience for humans and pets. It can also provide some additional physical comfort, especially for senior dogs. One 2018 study even found that women sleep better when sharing the bed with a dog.
But allowing your dog to lounge on your furniture can create extra chores because of the hair and dirt left behind. Some dogs might also find pillows and blankets fun to chew on.
However, there is one major factor that should influence your decision on whether to allow your dog on the furniture: resource guarding. If the dog growls when approached while on furniture, it’s best that you don’t allow them there.
You should also call a certified behavior consultant or applied animal behaviorist for help with behavior modification if your dog displays resource guarding behavior.
You can keep your dog off the couch by using positive reinforcement to teach them where they should rest instead, such as a dog bed. It’s important to have patience, consistency, and clarity.
Begin a no-couch policy as soon as you bring your puppy home. Have everything that’s fun and engaging, such as dog toys, on the floor and easily accessible for your pup.
This is a good method for young puppies that have never been allowed on a couch. But if you adopt an older dog that already has a history of jumping onto couches in their previous family and you’re not able to teach them to stay off on your own, contact a certified positive reinforcement trainer for help.
All dogs must have a safe and comfortable space to relax. Choose a space that isn’t in a high-traffic area. If your dog has a habit of going to a certain area on their own, place their bed there.
Without preferred bedding, your dog may not be enticed to relax in places other than the couch. Try a few different beds to find what your dog prefers. Some dogs love raised cots while others prefer a bed with a bolster. Senior dogs may benefit from an orthopedic dog bed with thick memory foam.
Spend time with your dog on the floor and in their space so they are not missing you. If the couch is the only place where you are, then that is exactly where your dog will want to be.
Play on the floor with them, and when they’re ready to nap, settle them on their bed or in their crate.
Use positive reinforcement to get your dog to rest on their bed instead of the couch. To do this:
Be sure everyone living with the dog are on the same page. Everyone must be willing to help the dog learn where they are expected to settle.
Teach a “go to your bed” cue. Begin by selecting a bed that meets your dog’s needs and preferences.
Place the bed near the couch and walk your dog over to it. When they step onto the bed, praise them and feed them a dog treat.
Ask your dog to lie down, praise them, and feed them a second treat. Continue to feed them a treat every few seconds so they remain on the bed, then release them.
Repeat the process until the dog starts going to the bed and lying down on their own. Praise, feed, and release them.
As they are lying down on the bed, say, “on your bed” to reinforce the cue. Once settled into their position, praise and feed.
Consistency is important to success. If your dog is allowed on the couch sometimes with some family members and not others, your dog will not be able to understand the constantly changing rules.
Dogs that get to rest on the couch occasionally will continue to try doing it—and may even try harder. The reinforcement they get from being able to access the couch even once will strengthen the behavior. The times when they are not allowed on the couch may cause frustration and even anxiety.
Pet parents can seek out a certified professional dog trainer to demonstrate how to keep dogs off the couch, avoid mistakes, and speed up the work.
Anything that scares your dog when they attempt to get on the couch should be avoided. This is especially true if you have a fearful dog or have recently rescued a dog that is just starting to get comfortable in their new home.
Most dogs are interested in the cushions, so try removing the cushions and standing them upright against a wall or the back of the couch. The springs that remain will be less enticing to your dog and may keep them off the couch.
Training and management are the most useful steps for keeping dogs off the couch. Sleeping on their bed must be more reinforcing than the couch, so use positive reinforcement when they settle on the bed and restrict access to furniture.
The one sure-fire, humane way to dog-proof your couch is not allowing the dog in the room where the couch is when you are not home. Another answer is to crate train your dog.
If your pup has confinement issues, try using a dog pen to block access to the furniture.
Do not use anything that could scare or hurt the dog if they jump up. Using fear-inducing tactics such as scat mats, pots and pans, and other items could cause fear and anxiety in your pet.  
WRITTEN BY
Erika Lessa, CBST, CDBT, CDBC, CPDT-KA, Fear-Free Certified
Professional Trainer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.