Victoria Schade, CPDT-KA
Adobe Stock/Kristina Blokhin
Introducing two dogs requires some forethought to make the meeting go smoothly for pups and people alike.
While it might be tempting to drop the leashes and let the dogs sort it out on their own the first time they meet one another, this type of approach isn’t a dog-safe solution. A slow and steady introduction is the best way to create a strong and appropriate foundation for their friendship.
Here’s how to introduce dogs the right way.
If dogs are going to be in the same space, the best way to foster canine friendship is through a gradual, positive introduction. Introducing dogs the right way increases the chances that they will get along and develop positive associations with each other. 
That said, it’s important to consider whether the dogs are even interested in meeting new friends. While some dogs crave canine companionship, some older dogs or dogs who didn’t have thorough socialization as a puppy might not need—or want—a buddy.
Always take your dog’s personality into consideration and do what’s best for them.
The following steps will ensure that both dogs involved in the introduction stay safe and enjoy the process of getting to know a new friend.
Make sure both dogs are wearing secure gear they can’t slip out of, such as a martingale collar or harness and a 6-foot leash. Flexible (or retractable) leashes aren’t recommended for this type of meeting, as they can unspool or snap under pressure.
You should also fill your pockets will small, high-value treats to reward moments of calm behavior.
The introduction should happen in a large outdoor space that’s neutral to both dogs, meaning neither has “claimed” it by frequent visits or marking. Ideally, this location should have enough space so the dogs can be at least 30 feet apart at first.
Be familiar with dog body language so you can react appropriately if either dog starts showing signs of reactivity or discomfort. A dog who’s feeling unsure about a potential meeting might:
Watch the other dog with a hard stare or hyper-fixate without breaking eye contact
Bare their teeth
Raise their hackles
Have a high, twitchy tail
Walk with a stiff gait
Growl or bark
If either dog exhibits these behaviors, call off the introduction and reassess whether it’s the right thing to do. Ideally, you want to see loose and wiggly body language, with frequent glances in your direction.
Remember: Your behavior also matters when introducing dogs. Keep an upbeat, cheerful attitude throughout the process, and make sure to praise your pup and offer small treats when they look up at you.
The first step in the process is for two people to walk the dogs in parallel, keeping them at least 30 feet apart. This way, they’re aware of one another but not close enough to focus on trying to reach each other.
Walk the dogs in the same direction with this wide buffer between them, offering a small treat when each dog looks away from the other and toward their walker. And don’t forget to praise them!
Once the dogs can walk calmly at this distance, trade places (while still maintaining a 30-foot separation) so each dog has a chance to sniff where the other dog just walked. Allow the dogs to check out any potty spots left by the other dog, as urine sniffing provides important biographical information.
If both dogs appear relaxed and are able to occasionally look up at their handlers, gradually decrease the distance between them while continuing the parallel walking.
Keep in mind that dogs’ responses can shift as they move closer to each other. Moving closer might “amp up” one or both of the dogs, and if that happens, it’s perfectly fine to return to the distance at which both dogs appeared relaxed.
The goal is to gradually close the distance between the two dogs until they can walk side by side. However, a smooth introduction might require several parallel walking sessions before both dogs are calm enough to get closer.
The key to success is letting the dogs tell their handlers when they feel comfortable bridging the distance, which is why understanding dog body language is so important.
Eventually, both parties should be able to close the gap completely so the dogs can greet and sniff each other. After a brief initial contact, resume walking with the dogs side by side and celebrate your success!
The following pointers will help ensure a successful dog-to-dog introduction:
This type of meeting isn’t suitable for dogs with barrier issues, such as leash reactivity or fence fighting, because seeing another dog at a distance might trigger an inappropriate response.
Avoid a head-on, face-to-face approach, as it’s a stressful and unnatural way for dogs to meet. This is why parallel walking is important.
If you’re not comfortable with how the dogs are responding to one another or you’re unsure about the behaviors they’re displaying, consider enlisting the help of a certified behaviorist or trainer to keep everyone safe.
WRITTEN BY
Victoria Schade, CPDT-KA
Animal Trainer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.