Adobe Stock/Tatyana Gladskih
Dogs show humans their love in different ways. They may wag their tail, lick you, or bring you their favorite toy. But what does it mean when your dog greets you at the door and stoops down into a deep stretch?
Learn more about this stretching behavior, which is commonly referred to as a dog’s “I love you” stretch.
If your dog greets you with their rump in the air and front legs stretched out in front of them, there are actually a few things that could prompt this behavior:
Some dogs might stretch as they greet you if they were lying down before you walked through the door.
Dogs might need to stretch to loosen up tight muscles as they approach you.
Dogs typically stretch when they are relaxed.
Your dog might be anticipating that they’ll be more active now that you’re home.
Some dogs might learn to exhibit this stretching behavior for you when the behavior is reinforced. So, if you think this behavior is cute and praise your pup every time they performed the stretching behavior, they’re more likely to stretch for you again.
Some pet parents might also inadvertently teach their dog a verbal or hand signal to cue them to stretch without realizing it.
For example, let’s say part of your routine is to place your hands on your knees, bend over, and speak to your dog while they get up to stretch. Over time, that specific behavior of bending over and placing your hands on your knees could trigger the dog to perform the stretch.
A stretch is typically perceived as a non-threatening behavior. Dogs can stretch for other reasons, depending on how they feel and the situation they’re in.
Dogs might stretch to convey to a stranger that they are not a threat and are looking to interact.
A dog in pain might stretch out the limb that’s causing discomfort. Dogs with abdominal pain might stretch out to try to alleviate pressure on their abdomen.
Some dogs stretch after waking up to loosen their muscles.
Some dogs might also stretch as a displacement behavior when they are feeling uncomfortable in a situation and do not know what to do.
A variation of a stretch is the play bow, in which the dog signals to other dogs and humans to initiate play. If this is what your dog wants, they might not lower their head as far as they normally do when stretching.
Keep in mind that dogs stretch for many reasons, so do not feel hurt if your dog doesn’t give you the “I love you” stretch when you come home. Their way of showing love might be giving you an “I love you” lick to your hand or face, leaning against you as you pet them, or jumping up on you.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Wailani Sung has a passion for helping owners prevent or effectively manage behavior problems in companion animals, enabling them to...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.