April Saylor
Daniel Megias/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
If you’ve ever caught your dog locking eyes with you during their bathroom break, you probably wondered, “Why do dogs look at you when they poop?” It might seem like an odd or even awkward behavior, but there may be more to it than meets the eye. 
Let’s explore why your dog might be giving you that intense stare during their most private moments. And, of course, answer the most important question … whether you should return the gaze or look away.
It’s a common scenario—your dog is doing their business and suddenly looks up at you with those big, soulful eyes. Maybe he’s pleading for privacy. Or perhaps he’s just glancing in your direction, making sure you’re close by. 
Your guess is as good as any, because this behavior is something of a mystery, even to veterinarians.
“Some dogs do this, but I have no idea why,” says Emily Gamm, DVM, an associate veterinarian at South Sioux Animal Hospital in South Sioux City, Nebraska. “Dogs are weird. Amazing, but weird.”
Even though we can’t say for certain why some dogs stare, there are plenty of theories about why dogs might look at you when they poop.
For most of us (including dogs), the act of going to the bathroom puts us in a defenseless position. In the wild, this would be a time when dogs would be susceptible to predators.
“[A theory] I think makes the most sense is that it can give them a sense of safety,” says Rochelle Hartson, DVM, a veterinarian at IGH Animal Hospital in Inver Grove Heights, Minnesota.
Dr. Hartson says dogs may look at you for reassurance, and lock eyes to make sure you’ve got their back while they do their thing.
Another reason could be that dogs are looking for praise or rewards. It may have been years since they went through potty training, when praise or treats used to reinforce the desired behavior (going in the right place). But this doesn’t matter, Dr. Hartson says, because “that potty training reward center goes deep.”
Dana Fedman, CPDT-KA, CDBC, is a dog behaviorist and founder of Pupstart Family Dog Training in Des Moines, Iowa. She likes to remind clients that canine bathroom habits—however weird they might seem to humans—are nothing personal. 
“Elimination is not a moral decision, it’s just a bodily habit,” she says. So while it’s certainly possible that your dog looks to you in anticipation of a reward, the reason they appear to stare may be more or less accidental.
“You’re probably just in their line of sight,” Fedman says. “Dogs aren’t going to look away because they’re ashamed—that’s a human trait.” 
We tend to project human traits onto our dogs’ behavior (an act known as anthropomorphism). So while it might seem like the dog is “staring” at us in the way a person would, in reality, your pooping pal is probably just glancing around as part of his natural behavior and happened to look your way. No special message intended.
Whether or not they’re looking at you for attention, backup, or just casually taking in the scenery while doing their duty, there will eventually come a time in every human-canine relationship when the two of you lock eyes during business time.
What’s the protocol here? Should you look away? Blink? Ask Fido if he’d like a magazine? 
Jokes aside, it really depends on the circumstances.
If you’re comfortable with it, there’s really no harm in maintaining eye contact. It may even provide the reassurance your dog is seeking (if he’s seeking any at all, that is). 
But if it feels too awkward, it’s OK to look away. Fedman says that reorienting yourself during potty breaks might make a stare-down less likely. “If you’re behind them, they might not look at you,” she says. “But if you’re standing next to them, they might glance over.”
Just keep in mind that your dog could be looking for a signal from you that indicates that everything’s all right. If you want to give him privacy, you can always offer words of praise once he’s wrapped things up just in case they need encouragement.
While maintaining eye contact may not be necessary, Dr. Gamm says keeping watch over your pup’s bathroom habits is a good idea. That way, it’s more likely you’ll notice any signs of discomfort—like straining, scooting, or other unusual behavior—that may mean it’s time to call the vet. 
Monitoring your dog’s bathroom breaks also gives you a chance to check the consistency and color of their poop, both helpful indicators of their general health and well-being.
“Your dog’s poop can be a very helpful indicator for their health status,” Dr. Gamm says. “Knowing what’s normal for your pet is crucial for helping you know when something is wrong.”
For example, Dr. Gamm says a pet that normally defecates once to twice a day that is suddenly going more frequently may have an upset stomach. She says to look out for “good” dog poops that are “... formed, but not overly hard or dry. If your pet’s feces are dry/hard and they’re straining or taking longer to go, this could be an indication of constipation or even dehydration.” 
Soft stools or diarrhea can also mean trouble. These symptoms can have many causes, including intestinal parasites, infection, diet change, or illness. Feeding canned pumpkin and starting probiotics may help ease your dog’s diarrhea, but call your vet if the soft stools last more than a few days.
The next time you catch your dog staring at you while they’re doing their business, rest assured that it’s perfectly fine to glance back.
It may be nothing aside from Fido’s scan of the surroundings, but at least you can use it as a reminder to keep an eye out for your buddy and ensure everything is going smoothly.
WRITTEN BY
April Saylor
Freelance Writer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.