PetMD Editorial
L-form bacteria are formed as a spontaneous variant of bacteria with defective or absent cell walls, or when cell wall synthesis is inhibited or impaired by antibiotics (e.g., penicillin), specific immunoglobulins, or lysosomal enzymes that degrade the cell walls. L-form bacteria are defective variations of regular bacterial cells, which can be almost any type of bacteria. L-forms are different from most other forms of bacteria in the respect that cell walls are an important component of organized cell division. While L-forms are still able to divide, creating more of themselves, they lack the same organizational structure as bacteria  with cell walls. L-forms replicate without regard to size, big and small, rather than being of one standard size. They have been found throughout nature, in humans, animals, and plants.
They can be induced from virtually all gram- positive and negative bacteria under suitable conditions. They occur sporadically in dogs.
Bites, scratches, or trauma may 	allow the organism to enter the skin  and subcutaneous tissue. Formation is also encouraged by 	antibiotic  treatment of the host, resistance of the host, 	suitability of the site  for establishment of the infective 	bacterium, and relatively low to  moderate virulence of the infecting 	bacterium.
L-form bacteria are difficult organisms to isolate and identify. Using a  process of differential diagnosis, which is guided by deeper inspection  of the apparent outward symptoms, ruling out each of the more common  causes until the correct disorder is settled upon and can be treated  appropriately, the veterinarian will make a diagnosis by putting all of  the signs and symptoms together, along with any consistent laboratory  results, to come to a conclusion. Your doctor will also collect some of  the fluid from any draining  lesions, as well as joint fluid fr analysis.

Gentle cleaning of the wound will help to degrade the fragile L-form organisms. In most cases, doctors allow the open wounds to heal by secondary intention; that is, the open edges of the wound are not intentionally closed (e.g., by stitches), but are allowed to heal by themselves, growing new tissue over the wound. The main treatment in this case is by cleansing the wound, applying antibiotic ointment to the wound, and applying fresh bandages.
Your veterinarian will prescribe medications such as antibiotics to treat the symptoms as well as the disease; however, these organisms are resistant and difficult to target with antibiotics. The fever usually breaks within 24-48 hours. In many cases, arthritic symptoms continue to persist.
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.