PetMD Editorial
A ventricular septal defect (VSD) causes irregular communication in the ventricular septum, the wall that separates the ventricles (the two lower chambers of the heart) from one another. This results in blood being diverted, or shunted, from one side of the heart to the other. The direction and volume of the shunt are determined by the size of the defect, the relationship of the pulmonary and systemic blood vessel resistances, and the presence of other anomalies.
Most VSDs in small animals are subaortic (below the aortic valve) and have a right ventricular hole that is beneath the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. In addition, most VSDs in dogs are small and therefore restrictive (i.e., the difference between left and right ventricular pressures is maintained). Moderate-sized VSDs are only partially restrictive and result in various degrees of high blood pressure in the right ventricle. Large VSDs, meanwhile, have an area that is as large as or larger than the open aortic valve in the left ventricle. They are nonrestrictive, and right ventricular pressure is the same as the body’s blood pressure. Only moderate and large defects impose a pressure load upon the right ventricle.
This defect is relatively uncommon in dogs.
Cats generally present no symptoms of the defect (asymptomatic); however symptoms commonly associated with ventricular septal defects include:
The underlying cause for ventricular septic defects are unknown, though a genetic basis is suspected.
You will need to give your veterinarian a thorough history of your dog's health and onset of symptoms. Your veterinarian will perform a thorough physical exam on your pet, with a complete blood profile, chemical blood profile, complete blood count, urinalysis and an electrolyte panel to rule out other concurrent diseases.
Imaging techniques like thoracic X-rays may help to detect larger VSDs, which would cause a left (or even a generalized) enlarged heart from the increased flow of blood through the heart. High blood pressure in the lungs, chronic heart failure and right to left shunts may be visualized as well.
A two-dimensional echocardiographic study, which uses sonographic imaging to view the activity of the heart, may demonstrate heart enlargement. The right heart will also be enlarged if the defect is moderate-sized or large, or if there are other heart abnormalities in addition to VSD.

Most patients can be treated on an outpatient basis. Large shunts may be surgically repaired during a cardiopulmonary bypass. Patients with moderate or large shunts may also undergo pulmonary artery banding as a palliative (relieves some discomfort but does not cure the disease) procedure.
If your dog  is showing signs of congestive heart failure (CHF), its activity should be restricted. Your veterinarian will advise you on an appropriate physical routine. Your doctor may also advise you to impose a strict low sodium diet if your dog is diagnosed with CHF, to minimize pressure on the heart. Animals that are diagnosed with overt CHF are generally given 6 to 18 months to live with medical treatment. Pets with small shunts may continue to have a normal life span if there are no concurrent disease that are posing a direct threat to their health.
Do not breed your dog if it has been diagnosed with ventricular septal defect, as this defect is thought to be genetically transmitted. Your veterinarian will schedule regular follow-up appointments for your dog to follow its progress, retake X-ray and ultrasound images, and adjust any medications or therapies as needed.
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.