By Dr. Jennifer Coates, DVM
If your dog has been diagnosed with H3N2 influenza, this is what you can expect to happen next.
After your dog has been diagnosed with the flu, your veterinarian will determine whether hospitalization is required. Severely affected dogs may need to stay at the veterinary clinic to receive oxygen therapy, injectable antibiotics, and to be closely monitored for a worsening in their ability to breathe. Some dogs may also receive medications that dilate their airways, thin mucus, or ease their cough.
Nebulization and coupage (breathing humidified air and chest thumping) can also help dogs cough up and eliminate thick secretions that block their airways. Anti-viral medications (e.g., Tamiflu) are generally not recommended since they work best early in the course of the disease, before most dogs are brought to the veterinarian.
Once dogs with H3N2 are stable enough to continue their treatment at home, they can be discharged from the hospital.
Most cases of H3N2 flu in dogs can be treated at home. Supportive care is critical to a dog’s recovery. Dogs should be encouraged to eat, drink, and rest. If your dog is taking oral antibiotics, make sure to follow the instructions written on the label and give the entire course, even if your dog’s condition appears to be back to normal. Follow your veterinarian’s instructions regarding any other medications that have been prescribed.
Dogs who have been diagnosed with H3N2 flu should be isolated from other dogs for 14 days to prevent spread of the disease.
If you have more than one dog, ask your veterinarian if anything other than isolation can be done to decrease the chances that your other dogs will come down with H3N2. A canine flu vaccine is available, but it was designed to work against H3N8 flu viruses. It’s efficacy against H3N2 is unknown.
Find out whom you should call if an emergency arises outside of your veterinarian’s normal business hours.
Talk to your veterinarian if you have any questions or concerns about your dog’s condition.
Canine Influenza (Dog Flu)
Should You Vaccinate Yur Dog Against Canine Flu?
As the Flu Outbreak Worsens, What Should You Do?
How Worried Should You Be About Your Pet's Health?
Image: Melis / Shutterstock
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Jennifer Coates is an accomplished veterinarian, writer, editor, and consultant with years of experience in the fields of veterinary...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.