PetMD Editorial
Wirestock/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
Like humans, dogs can suffer from hernias.
Inguinal hernias in dogs occur when the internal organs (intestines, bladder, and uterus) burst through the inguinal ring (opening in the muscle wall in the groin area), abdominal wall, and muscle layer. This protrusion can be seen as a bulge or swelling just below the skin. 
For most dogs, this can be easily seen or felt on either side or both sides of the groin area. Contents may be able to be pushed back into the opening by a veterinarian.
Inguinal hernias can occur in both dogs and cats. Inguinal hernias in puppies can also occur as congenital defects, meaning they were born with them. 
Unfortunately, inguinal hernias in dogs are common. However, the good news is that they may not always be a cause of immediate alarm. 
However, if the organs become trapped in the opening, their blood supply can become compromised or cut off leading to strangulation and death of the organ, which can cause life-threatening complications. 
Not only would this be painful for the dog, but it would also be considered a surgical emergency.
In this article, you’ll learn everything you need to know about inguinal hernias in dogs—from symptoms to look out for to prevention.
There are two types of inguinal hernias in dogs.
Uncomplicated—Either due to a smaller defect with little to no protrusion of abdominal contents or protrusion of just fat or omentum (a membrane of tissue that covers the abdominal organs). These types of hernias usually cause no symptoms.
Complicated—Contents of the abdominal cavity have passed through the opening and become entrapped.
Most inguinal hernias are uncomplicated and cause no symptoms other than a swelling in the groin area.
However, if contents from the abdominal cavity (such as the bladder, a loop of intestine or the uterus) pass through the opening and become entrapped there, the situation can become life-threatening.
As a pet parent, you may be wondering— what does an inguinal hernia look like on a dog? Signs of inguinal hernias in dogs vary, depending on whether the hernia is uncomplicated or complicated.
Symptoms of an uncomplicated inguinal hernia in dogs may include:
A soft swelling (non-painful) in the groin area, which may occur on one or both sides of the body
Symptoms of a complicated inguinal hernia in dogs may include:
Swelling in the groin area, which may become painful and warm to the touch
Vomiting
Frequent attempts to urinate
Bloody urine
Lack of appetite
Depression
Abdominal pain
Retching or attempting to vomiting
Straining to defecate
Painful urination/defecation
Fever
Lethargy
Localized bruising
Inguinal hernias in dogs may be acquired (not present at birth but develop later in life) or congenital (present at birth).
Factors which predispose a dog to develop an inguinal hernia include trauma (blunt force trauma, getting hit by a car, bite wounds), obesity, and pregnancy (due to increased abdominal pressure).
Older, intact (not spayed) female dogs are more at risk for acquired hernias due to anatomical and hormonal factors. Estrogen can weaken the tissue.
Young male dogs are more at risk for congenital inguinal hernias, especially breeds such as:
Pekingese
Cairn Terriers
West Highland White Terrier
Retrievers (Labrador, Golden)
Cocker Spaniels
Dachshunds
Nutritional and endocrine conditions can also predispose dogs to inguinal hernias such as though diagnosed with Cushing's disease, diabetes or even certain rectal diseases.
Inguinal hernias can usually be diagnosed by finding the swelling caused by the hernia on a physical examination.
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the hernia contents may be performed for confirmation but carries a risk.
It's important that you notify your veterinarian if your dog is pregnant or has been pregnant and if she is currently being treated for any other co-morbidities like diabetes or Cushing's.
Sometimes contrast radiographs (X-rays) or an abdominal ultrasound are needed to determine which abdominal contents, if any, are entrapped.
Treatment of inguinal hernias in dogs is surgical correction of the opening and replacement of abdominal contents back into the abdomen if necessary. The edges of the opening are often surgically debrided and closed with a permanent type of suture. 
Surgical mesh may be necessary if the defect is exceptionally large.
If the defect is small or uncomplicated, therapy may not be needed but your veterinarian may recommend monitoring your pup’s hernia for future swelling, change in size or appearance, or the development of acute symptoms.
Complicated inguinal hernias require surgical repair. Dogs can often be spayed/neutered at the same time to help prevent recurrence.
Depending on the severity, portion(s) of the intestines may need to be surgically removed. 
Your veterinarian will send home pain medications like gabapentin or tramadol as well as an anti-inflammatory medication, such as carprofen, deracoxib, or meloxicam. 
Give all medications as directed by your vet.
Fortunately, dogs often rebound quickly after this procedure. Giving pain medicine helps the healing process and improves recovery time.
Do not give your pup any human or over-the-counter pain medications.
Most of the time, dogs having undergone this type of surgery rarely require antibiotics.
Even though it’s a bit uncomfortable for your dog, wearing a recovery cone is the best way to protect their incision and allow it to heal without complications.
Properly fitted, the cone should allow you to fit a couple of fingers through the base and the collar should extend past your dog’s nose.
Alternatively, a recovery suit or similar clothing is another way to protect the incision and provide comfort, but it should be kept clean and routinely laundered.
Do not remove the recovery cone or surgical suit unless your dog is supervised or as directed by your veterinarian.
The cost of inguinal hernia surgery (herniorrhaphy) in dogs varies depending on the type of hernia present. A complicated herniorrhaphy can be more expensive. 
Veterinary practices may charge anywhere from $400 to $8,000 or more. 
Some pet insurance companies may cover some or all the cost unless specifically stated in their terms and conditions. 
Alternative payment options may include applying for CareCredit® or setting up a payment plan, if available. 
Learn about CarePlus, insurance plans with exclusive Chewy benefits
Pet insurance that can cover Rx costs and more
Be sure to follow the post-operative (aftercare) instructions, which usually include a two-week confinement period of:
Limited exercise
No jumping
No running
No rough play with others
If your dog is active during this confinement period, it could lead to dehiscence, or breakdown of the surgical repair. This will cause additional therapies/surgeries.
A suitable place for your pup to rest and recover is their crate, with padded, comfortable bedding, or in a small room closed off with a gate.
Don’t bathe your dog during recovery, and don’t allow their incision site to become wet. Additionally, do not leave your dog unattended for at least the first 24 hours after surgery.
Be sure to keep the incision clean and dry and inspected at least once daily. Note any changes in appearance of the incision that could be a sign of infection.
Seek veterinary attention immediately if you notice:
Redness or changes in color
Any type of discharge: clear, red (bloody), white (pus), or a mixture of all
Odor
Swelling
Heat coming from the incision
Tenderness upon touch
Excessive bruising (mild bruising may be noted at first but should improve daily)
Loose or missing stitches/staples
Puckering or gaping of the incision
Because inguinal hernias in dogs can be hereditary, pups with hernias should not be bred.
Have your puppy checked during their first few vet appointments to see if a hernia can be felt. If detected early, hernias can be corrected sooner and prevent future health issues. 
Puppy-proof your home and monitor play behavior. Always keep your pup on a leash when outside to minimize trauma and inguinal herniation as a complication.
Since obesity is a risk factor, keep your dog at a healthy body weight with proper nutrition and exercise.
For female dogs, it’s best that they are spayed—not only as a preventative measure against hernias, but for other life-threatening conditions as well.
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.