Thanawath Seangsuriyapone/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
Mange in dogs is a skin disease caused by mites found in the hair follicles of canines. It’s caused by two different types of mites, Sarcoptes and Demodex.
These microscopic mites cause dogs to feel extremely itchy and uncomfortable. Some mange infections can even be spread from dogs to cats, and dogs to people (or vice versa).
However, not all mite infections lead to mange—ear mites cause ear infections.
There are two types of mange in dogs. These include:
Sarcoptic mange—Also known as scabies, this type of mange is caused by Sarcoptes scabiei. Sarcoptic mange in dogs is less common than demodectic mange.
This type of mange usually affects homeless dogs. It’s also more common in dogs with compromised immune systems. This type of mange is transmissible to humans, other dogs, and other pets.
A subtype of scabies called Norwegian scabies is characterized by severe skin crusting and is thought to be worsened by a compromised immune system. 
Demodectic mange—This type of mange is also called red mange and is caused by external parasites Demodex canis, Demodex injai, or Demodex cornei.
This type of mange is transmitted between a mother and puppy during nursing.
Demodectic mange in dogs is not transmissible between pups nor humans.
So, what does mange look like on a dog? Symptoms may include:
Severe itching 
Alopecia (hair loss) 
Excoriations (self-inflicted superficial or deep wounds from the intense scratching) 
Raised bumps (papules) most commonly on the chest
Thick crusted skin, typically found on the edges of the ear flap, the ankles of the back legs, armpits, and elbows
Often, secondary skin infections occur because of the skin lesions.
Severe itching and uncomfortable skin issues may cause other symptoms of mange in dogs, including:
Weight loss
Depression
Decreased appetite
Lethargy
Enlarged lymph nodes
You may also wonder—what does mange look like in puppies?
Puppies with mange will experience the same symptoms as adult dogs and should be seen by a vet immediately.
Sarcoptic mites are often transmitted through close contact between dogs, such as in shelters, boarding facilities, or other places with high numbers of pups.
This type of mite does not survive for long periods of time in the environment and needs a host to continue its life cycle.
Scabies isn’t caused exclusively by bad hygiene, but it can worsen through a pet parent neglecting their pup, or a compromised immune system. Scabies are attracted to oils (lipids) on a dog’s skin.
Demodectic mites normally live on the skin of a dog and their immune system keeps the population under control.
Typically, this mite is only passed between dogs when they are puppies and is most often passed from mother to puppy. This mite causes mange when the mite overpopulates within the hair follicle. 
Mange in dogs is diagnosed by a vet.
Your vet may:
Perform a physical exam
Perform a cytology (study of cells to look at their function and structure)
Perform a skin scrape test
A skin scrape is performed by a veterinarian using a blade to scrape the surface of a dog’s skin to collect skin cells. These cells are then looked at under a microscope.
This is the most common method used when vets diagnose mange in dogs.
Take a hair sample from your dog
A hair sample can be plucked from your dog's fur to look for live mites within the hair follicle.
This can also be used to rule out other similar skin disease.
Perform a fecal test
Perform a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test
Take a skin biopsy (in severe cases of mange)
Treatment of mange in dogs includes topical medications, shampoos, and often antiparasitic medications.
Sometimes antibiotics—like Convenia® or cephalexin—are needed to treat secondary bacterial skin infections that result from a dog scratching themselves.
Treatment is tailored for the different types of mange and the severity of the infection.
A cone or suit may also be recommended during a dog’s treatment and recovery. 
Mange in dogs can’t be treated at home—affected pups should be seen by a vet for proper treatment.
Recovery from mange in dogs begins with treatment by a veterinarian. A dog that’s affected by scabies must have their environment disinfected.
Pet parents should wash and disinfect all:
Kennels
Crates
Collars
Bedding
Toys
Since mites only live a few days in the environment, they are relatively easy to get rid of. Wash all bedding and toys in a washing machine with a hot water setting.
It’s important for dogs in the environment to remain on monthly or tri-monthly preventatives to avoid infection and re-infestation. 
Demodectic mange does not require environmental cleaning as it isn’t contagious, though a monthly or tri-monthly miticidal preventative is still recommended.  
Most dogs with mange can expect a full recovery with appropriate therapy.
For chronic cases, it’s typically due to an underlying systemic illness or secondary infections.
Mange is fatal when dogs receive the wrong therapy, or their underlying medical conditions are not managed correctly.
Mange in dogs can be prevented with routine veterinary visits along with using consistent preventative care.
Having your dog checked by their veterinarian annually can catch any underlying disease before it comes a serious problem.
You can also prevent mange in dogs by giving an appropriate flea and tick prevention such as:
Bravecto®
Simparica Trio™
NexGard®
Interceptor™
Making sure your four-legged family member is healthy and nourished will also help prevent them from getting mange.
Some causes of mange in dogs are highly contagious to people. Scabies is the most common contagious skin mite between dogs and people.
Demodex mange is not contagious to people.
Dogs with mange should be touched with gloves, and pet parents should adhere to strict hygiene when touching their dog, including washing their hands with antibacterial soap.
Yes, mange can kill a dog over time if not treated—affected dogs will slowly become emaciated and malnourished.
Dogs with mange often have other underlying illness which causes them to succumb to the disease, as well.
Early-stage mange can look like pyoderma, allergies, or even a flea infestation.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Katie Grzyb received her Doctorate of Veterinary Medicine from Ross University in 2009. She continued her clinical training at...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.