Keratitis is a term used to describe inflammation of the cornea, the clear outer layer of the eye. Non- ulcerative keratitis describes an inflammatory process in the cornea.
A dog’s eye is made up of several tissue layers and anatomical structures. A dog’s eyelid is similar to those of humans, except for the nictitating membrane, or third eyelid. Just below the eyelid is the eyeball, or globe, which houses many structures necessary for vision.
Large structures that can be seen without specialized equipment include the cornea, the surrounding white tissue (sclera), the colored portion (iris), and the dark pupil in the center of the eye. With non-ulcerative keratitis, the cornea is the portion of the eye affected.
Acute non-ulcerative keratitis may not involve any obvious changes to the cornea at first, but in some cases it may be possible to notice a subtle cloudiness or haziness to the eye. When the condition becomes more chronic, buildup of dark pigmentation on the cornea begins. In contrast, ulcerative keratitis involves a disruption in the top layer of the cornea, which may or may not be visible with the naked eye and is diagnosed by your veterinarian.
There are several types of non-ulcerative keratitis in dogs, including:
These conditions may require different treatments, and which is why diagnosis and testing is so important.
Visual symptoms of non-ulcerative keratitis include:
Nonspecific symptoms of non-ulcerative keratitis include:
There are several possible causes of non-ulcerative keratitis in dogs, and determining the correct one affects prognosis and treatment goals. The most common causes of non-ulcerative keratitis include:
Diagnosis of non-ulcerative keratitis typically starts with a basic physical exam as well as blood work, urinalysis, and possibly x-rays to make sure there are no underlying reasons for the inflammation outside of the eye. Testing specific to the eyes includes:
Treatment of non-ulcerative keratitis depends on the underlying cause of the inflammation. Common therapies include:
While there are a lot of home remedies available for eye infections in dogs, it is important to consult with your veterinarian prior to usage. Many homeopathic medications are not FDA-approved and using them may delay healing and worsen clinical signs.
The timeline of recovery depends on the underlying cause of the inflammation. Many dogs with non-ulcerative keratitis require lifelong therapies if the condition is related to an auto-immune disease or chronic superficial inflammation (pannus). In cases of trauma, infection, and confirmational causes like trichiasis, full recovery is possible once the underlying cause is addressed and treated.
It may not be possible to fully prevent non-ulcerative keratitis, as some dogs are predisposed to this condition. For example, brachycephalic breeds are more at risk for trauma and secondary infections. Cocker Spaniels are at high risk for the development of dry eye, and German Shepherds are known to develop pannus. Although complete prevention may not be possible, talking with your veterinarian as soon as you notice any abnormalities is the first step in preventing progression of the disease.
If no ulceration is present, your vet may recommend anti-inflammatories, such as topical steroids, along with antibiotics and lubrication as needed.
Inflammation is secondary to irritation, infection, or immune stimulation.
While there is some crossover between human and dog eye medications, some are dangerous to use, depending on the underlying disease. Talk to your veterinarian prior to starting any topical or oral medications.
At this time, at-home treatment without consultation with a veterinarian is not recommended. Inappropriate treatments may put your dog at risk for worsening of disease and permanent vision loss.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Currently living in Tampa, Florida, Riley enjoys working in Emergency Medicine and has a passion for Critical Care Medicine. In her off...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.