Adobe Stock/Mariusz Blach
Canine parvovirus (CPV, or commonly referred to as “parvo”) is one of the most serious viruses that dogs can get. Thankfully, it is very preventable with proper vaccination.
This virus was discovered in the 1970s and rapidly became a serious threat to canine health. This is primarily because the virus is hard to kill, can live for a long time in the environment, is shed in large quantities by infected dogs, is highly contagious, and is often fatal without appropriate treatment. This is why the parvo vaccine is considered a core vaccine for puppies and dogs.
While the highly effective parvovirus vaccine has decreased the risk to properly vaccinated dogs, parvo in dogs is still widely prevalent, especially in puppies and poorly vaccinated adolescent dogs.
Here’s everything you need to know about parvo in dogs—how to protect your puppy, parvo symptoms to look for, and what to do if you your dog is sick.
Health Tools
Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.

Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.
Canine parvovirus is an infectious DNA virus that commonly causes severe illness in young and unvaccinated dogs. It primarily affects the body’s rapidly dividing cells, meaning the intestinal tract and bone marrow are the most affected. Heart muscle cells of very young puppies can also be damaged by parvovirus.
Although parvovirus is most common in puppies and adolescent dogs, it can also affect adult or senior dogs, especially if they are unvaccinated.
A dog with parvovirus will usually start to show parvo symptoms within three to seven days of infection. Early signs of parvo include:
Lethargy
Lack of appetite
Fever
As the virus progresses, your dog may begin to experience:
Abdominal pain
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Very sick puppies with parvovirus may:
Collapse
Have a high heart rate
Have difficulty breathing
Have low white blood cell (WBC) counts
Be hypothermic
Be hypoglycemic
Parvo in dogs is spread by contact with contaminated feces, but you don’t have to see feces for the virus to be present. It can live on surfaces that have been contaminated, including on:
The ground
Kennels
Peoples’ hands
Objects
Clothing
Dogs can also carry parvovirus on their fur or paws if they’ve come in contact with contaminated material.
Parvovirus in dogs is an incredibly contagious disease that spreads quickly and efficiently. Parvovirus can survive in a dog’s environment for months, if not years, and it’s resistant to many disinfectants. However, it is susceptible to diluted bleach and some specialized cleaners commonly used in veterinary hospitals.
Parvovirus is species-specific, so humans have their own version of the virus. This means that humans cannot get parvovirus from dogs, and dogs cannot get parvovirus from people.
However, it’s still important to use the utmost caution by wearing personal protective equipment if you come into contact with a parvo puppy. While you may not get parvo, the virus could be spread to another dog via your hands or clothes.
Fecal SNAP ELISA tests (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), otherwise called Parvo SNAP tests, are the most common way of diagnosing parvo in dogs and puppies. The test requires a fecal swab and takes about 10 minutes.
While this test is accurate, a negative result does not necessarily rule out parvovirus in a symptomatic dog, as they may not be shedding the viral antigen at the time of testing. Further testing may be needed in these cases.
The stages of canine parvovirus are the same as most viral infections: infection, incubation, and illness.
The puppy (or adult dog) is exposed to parvovirus via fecal material from an infected dog.
Even if there is no visible feces, a dog can be infected by the environment (ground or surface) or an object that came into contact with an infected dog.
There is an incubation period (usually three to seven days) in which the dog is infected with parvovirus but not yet showing symptoms.
During this period, the virus specifically seeks out the most rapidly dividing cells in the body—typically, it starts attacking the tonsils or lymph nodes in the throat. By targeting these rapidly dividing cells, the virus is able to multiply effectively and efficiently to invade other parts of the dog’s system.
Once parvovirus has multiplied and entered the bloodstream, the virus will seek out other sources of rapidly diving cells. The most hard-hit areas are:
Bone marrow
Cells that line the walls of the small intestines
In very young puppies, parvovirus can also infect the heart, which causes inflammation of the heart muscle, poor heart function, and arrhythmias.
When parvovirus infects the bone marrow, it attacks the young immune cells, which leads a drop in protective white blood cells.
This weakens the body’s ability to protect itself and allows the virus to invade the gastrointestinal (GI) tract more easily. This is where the worst damage happens. The virus attacks the lining of the small intestine, which prevents the dog’s GI tract from being able to:
Absorb nutrients
Prevent fluid loss into the stool
Stop bacteria from moving into the gut wall and then into the bloodstream
This leads to serious health issues.
While parvo in dogs is not always fatal, those that do not survive typically die from dehydration or shock—along with the damage caused by the septic toxins from the intestinal bacteria escaping into the bloodstream.
There is no specific cure for parvovirus in dogs, so treatment revolves around supporting the puppy so their body can fight it off.
Supportive care for canine parvovirus generally includes:
Hospitalization with intravenous fluids
Antiemetics to stop vomiting
Focusing on nutrition, with a feeding tube, if necessary
Correction of any electrolyte imbalances or low blood glucose
Some vets may also recommend treatment with a canine parvo monoclonal antibody (CPMA)
Puppies exhibiting signs of sepsis—where the gut becomes so “leaky” from disease that bacteria from the intestines enter the bloodstream—require antibiotic therapy. Puppies with a high fever or low white blood cell count may also receive antibiotics.
The cost of treatment for parvovirus in dogs varies based on the severity of the illness, length of the hospital stay, and location of the veterinary clinic.
Costs could start around several hundred dollars for outpatient treatment and go up to several thousand dollars for a severe case with hospitalization. On average, expect treatment to cost $1,000–$2,100 minimum.
It’s much more cost-effective to have your dog fully vaccinated than to have them contract parvovirus. A parvo vaccine typically costs $30–50.
Recovery from parvovirus in dogs varies case by case. Full recovery may take quite a while depending on the severity of the disease and the damage it has done. Dogs that can recover from infection are often sick for five to 10 days after symptoms begin.
It is very important that puppies with parvovirus receive adequate nutrition so their intestines can heal. Dogs recovering from a parvo infection should be fed a bland, easily digestible diet. Hill’s Science Diet®, Purina®, and Royal Canin® all make prescription veterinary diets that are carefully formulated to be nutritionally balanced and gentle on the GI tract:
Hill’s® Prescription Diet Digestive Care i/d dry dog food
Hill’s® Prescription Diet Digestive Care i/d wet dog food
Purina® Pro Plan® Veterinary Diets EN Gastroenteric dry dog food
Purina® Pro Plan® Veterinary Diets EN Gastroenteric wet dog food
Royal Canin® Veterinary Diet Gastrointestinal Low Fat dry dog food
Royal Canin® Veterinary Diet Puppy Gastrointestinal dry dog food
Royal Canin® Veterinary Diet Gastrointestinal Low Fat wet dog food
Hospital stays generally last around five to seven days, but this varies depending on the severity of symptoms. The highest risk of death occurs around 24–72 hours after you see symptoms of parvo in dogs.
If a parvo puppy is hospitalized, given lots of supportive care, and monitored closely, the survival rate is usually around 85–95%. Survival is more difficult if the dog is not given veterinary attention quickly after showing clinical signs or if the dog is not hospitalized with sufficient supportive care.
Dogs exposed to parvo have an incubation period of three to seven days. During this time, they may start to shed the virus a few days before they show clinical signs. 
Dogs treated for parvo will often need to be hospitalized for five to seven days but may be sick even longer. Most dogs are considered recovered and no longer infectious after 14 days from the onset of the first clinical signs, although in some cases it may be up to 21 days. After being shed, the parvo virus can live in the environment for months or even years.
There are no home remedies for parvo in dogs. In some cases, if a dog is not severely ill or if expensive treatment is prohibitive, then treatment on an outpatient basis may be attempted with help from the vet.
Outpatient treatment for parvo in dogs includes:
Subcutaneous fluids (fluids given under the skin as a source of hydration)
A special, highly digestible diet
Antiemetics to stop vomiting
Antidiarrheals
Antibiotics
While some dogs can recover from this protocol, parvo treatment is much safer and more successful if the dog is hospitalized.
The canine parvo vaccine is most often given in a combination vaccine that goes by a variety of acronyms: DHPP, DAPP, DA2PP, DHLPP, etc. This is considered a core vaccine and should be given every two to four weeks from 6–8 weeks to 16–20 weeks of age.
The most important thing for preventing parvo is making sure you get your puppy in on time for their vaccines.
Puppies should only socialize with fully vaccinated dogs until they are able to be fully vaccinated themselves. Areas where your puppy can come into contact with unvaccinated dogs, such as dog parks, should be avoided.
A dog will need to receive a booster vaccine at 1 year of age to be considered fully vaccinated. Dogs should also continue to receive vaccines every one to three years for life or have their immunity monitored using parvovirus antibody tests.
Yes, dogs and puppies can be successfully treated for parvovirus. They have a much better chance of survival if hospitalized for IV fluids and medications versus those treated with outpatient therapy.  
Initially, a puppy may seem lethargic and disinterested in food. This can progress to vomiting and diarrhea (with or without blood) and fever.
Take your puppy to the vet right away if they are experiencing lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, or diarrhea. The vet will likely start with a parvo test and make a plan from there.
While no vaccine can promise to be 100% effective, the canine parvovirus vaccine provides excellent protection from the virus. It is very unlikely that an appropriately vaccinated dog would become ill with canine parvovirus.
Immunity for parvovirus lasts for several years. While not impossible, it is very unlikely that a dog that has recovered from canine parvovirus would get it again.
However, this does not mean that your dog does not need to be vaccinated against canine parvovirus if they’ve recovered from it in the past. Routine vaccinations should still be performed.
Cats also have a type of parvovirus that causes severe disease, known as feline panleukopenia. While dogs cannot get feline parvovirus from cats, cats can become infected with canine parvovirus. Cats often have much more mild clinical signs than dogs do, but there is a strain of parvo in puppies and dogs that can cause severe illness in cats.
The feline parvovirus vaccine, which is part of the core FVRCP vaccine, may offer some cross-protection against canine parvovirus.
 Chalifoux NV, Parker SE, Cosford KL. Prognostic indicators at presentation for canine parvoviral enteritis: 322 cases (2001‐2018). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2021;31(3):402-413.
Horecka K, Porter S, Amirian ES, Jefferson E. A Decade of Treatment of Canine Parvovirus in an Animal Shelter: A Retrospective Study. Animals. 2020;10(6):939.
Parvovirus: Transmission to treatment. Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine.

Chalifoux NV, Parker SE, Cosford KL. Prognostic indicators at presentation for canine parvoviral enteritis: 322 cases (2001‐2018). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care. 2021;31(3):402-413.
Horecka K, Porter S, Amirian ES, Jefferson E. A Decade of Treatment of Canine Parvovirus in an Animal Shelter: A Retrospective Study. Animals. 2020;10(6):939.
Parvovirus: Transmission to treatment. Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Ellen Malmanger is originally from Arkansas, but attended Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine for veterinary school....
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.