PetMD Editorial
A rash (pyoderma) is usually a temporary outbreak of scaly, patchy, and sometimes swollen or bumpy skin that is often red and may be itchy.
A rash can occur on any part of your dog’s body, but it pops up most often on the belly. A rash by itself is usually minor and often goes away on its own, but it can be a sign of a more serious situation. The cause of rashes on a dog can range from parasites to diabetes.
Here’s what you should know about rashes on dogs, from what to look for to possible causes and their treatments.
If your dog’s rash gets worse or does not go away after a week, take your dog to the vet to be examined.
With rashes on dogs, you may see:
Red, bumpy skin
Dandruff or flakes of skin in your dog’s fur
Hot spots
Hair loss (alopecia)
Excessive scratching
Hives (urticaria)
Mites (cheyletiellosis), also called walking dandruff
A rash can occur anywhere on a dog’s body. The location of the rash can provide some clues as to what health issue may have caused it:
Belly rash or underarm rash: A belly rash on a dog is one of the more common reasons pet parents take their dogs to the vet. Rashes also often appear in a dog’s “underarms,” more accurately, the point where a dog’s front and hind legs meet the chest or abdomen. These rashes have many causes:
Allergies
Insect bites
Irritation from a chemical substance, like fertilizer
Bacterial infection
Groin-area rash: Like a belly rash, a rash in your dog’s groin area is often due to:
Allergies,
Insect bites
Infection
A tumor: Male dogs with testicular tumors and unspayed females with hormone issues may have hair loss and a rash beginning in the groin area.
Paw rash: Known as pododermatitis, this is inflammation of the paws that can include a rash. Causes can include:
Infection
Cancer
Injury
Irritating substances
Lack of grooming
Low levels of thyroid hormone
Your vet will give your dog a physical exam and ask questions about your dog’s diet, current health issues, home environment, and other factors. To diagnose a rash, your veterinarian will perform a number of tests, depending on the suspected cause, including:
Allergy tests if an allergen is suspected. This may include a food elimination diet or intradermal allergy testing.
Skin scraping to look for mites, bacteria, fungus, or other potential causes.
Skin biopsy, where a piece of skin is examined at a pathology laboratory (done in cases of recurring infection or rash).
Blood profile to check for diseases such as thyroid issues (hypothyroidism) or Cushing’s disease
To eliminate the rash and make sure it doesn’t come back, your vet will need to find and treat any underlying medical condition that’s causing it.
They may also recommend several treatments for the rash and related symptoms. These may include:
Grooming (such as brushing or cutting away hair)
Oatmeal baths
Medicated dog shampoo (containing antifungal or antibacterial ingredients)
Anti-itch and anti-inflammatory medications
Elizabethan collar or e-collar to prevent a dog from irritating hot spots by licking or biting
Epsom salt foot soaks if your dog’s paws are inflamed. Follow your veterinarian’s instructions, as these can dry out the skin if used inappropriately. Do not allow your dog to drink the solution, which has high sodium levels.
Featured image: iStock.com/SeventyFour
Depending on the cause and location of the rash (and accompanying symptoms), a veterinarian may recommend oatmeal baths, medicated dog shampoos, or medication to reduce itching and inflammation. Do not give your dog any medications without a veterinarian’s recommendation and guidance.
Rashes can appear red, bumpy, inflamed, or like welts. There might be hair loss or hot spots, areas of  skin that are inflamed and oozing.
Causes of rash in dogs are numerous and range from allergies and insect bites, which are most common, to thyroid conditions and cancer.
 
Smith, John. American Heartworm Society. Heartworm Basics. January 2020. 
Veterinary Partner. Pruritus Diagnostics in Dogs and Cats. October 2003.
Brooks, Wendy. Veterinary Partner. Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats. January 2001.
White, S.D. Merck Veterinary Manual. Hives and Rashes (Urticaria) in Dogs. June 2018.


Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.