The ingredients in rodenticides, or rat poison, are extremely dangerous for dogs, and accidental ingestion is one of the most common forms of pet poisoning.
Rat poisons come in a variety of colors—such as green, blue, tan, pink, and red—and formulations, including pellets, bait blocks, powders, pastes, cereal, and soft baits.
Each of the four most common active ingredients in rat poisons have different mechanisms for poisoning and treatment for toxicity. Unfortunately, the active ingredient cannot be identified based on the appearance of the product or bait.
If your dog eats rat poison, it is important that you bring any remaining bait or packaging to the vet with you to aid in identification of the active ingredient. 
The four most common active ingredients are:  
If your dog eats rat poison (regardless of amount or active ingredient), take them immediately to a local veterinary hospital for evaluation and treatment. 
Health Tools
Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.

Answer a few questions about your pet's symptom, and our vet-created Symptom Checker will give you the most likely causes and next steps.
Clinical signs will vary depending on the active ingredient in the rat poison and the amount ingested. Unfortunately, symptoms often take 1-7 days to show after ingestion of a toxic dose.
Many rodenticides contain dyes (red, green, blue, pink, and tan) that may stand out in your dog’s stool.  Any time you see foreign material in your pet’s stool, contact your veterinarian immediately.
Clinical signs of anticoagulant rodenticides are based on signs of internal bleeding and may include:
Lethargy
Pale gums
Trouble breathing/increased breathing rate
Weakness/collapse
Decreased appetite
Less common signs can include bloody diarrhea, nose bleeds, bruising, bloody urine, swollen joints, bleeding from gums, vaginal bleeding (if pregnant), pharyngeal swelling, and even seizures (from bleeding in the brain)
Clinical signs of cholecalciferol rodenticides are related to the hardening of soft tissues, with the kidneys being most susceptible, and may include:
Weakness
Anorexia/vomiting
Increased thirst and increased urination (which may be a sign of acute kidney failure)
Clinical signs of bromethalin rodenticides are related to the effects on the brain, and can include:
Lack of coordination/stumbling
Tremors/seizures
Paralysis
Clinical signs of zinc and aluminum phosphides will be related to the toxic phosphine gas that is produced. The gas itself is corrosive and can damage multiple organs. Clinical signs with this active ingredient can occur within minutes, and in severe cases death can occur in as little as 5 hours after exposure. Clinical signs may include:
Lethargy
Vomiting (may be bloody)
Diarrhea (may be bloody)
Lack of coordination/weakness
Tremor/seizures           
Trouble breathing
Stomach bloating/abdominal pain
Phosphine gas has an odor of decaying fish or garlic and is extremely toxic to humans as well as pets.  If your pet vomits on the way to the veterinarian, be sure to roll down the windows (safely) for maximum ventilation. Any symptomatic person should seek advice from human poison control or medical professionals.
Most rat poison cases in dogs are the result of unintentional ingestion of bait. In rare cases, poisoning may be due to malicious intent. When you and your dog are visiting a friend or family member or leaving a dog with a sitter, ask about potential poisons around the home.
Poisoning in dogs can theoretically occur as a secondary or “relay toxicity” if a dog eats a rat who died from rat poison ingestion. This type of poisoning has never been documented in research, so while it is possible, it is considered highly unlikely.
If you see your dog eat any type of rat poison or suspect that they may have ingested rat poisoning, take them immediately to your local veterinary emergency hospital. 
An emergency vet will collect a thorough medical history to help their assessment. If possible, bring the bait packaging, because determining the active ingredient is crucial to treatment. Calling the pet poison hotlines may also be beneficial, as they can look up packaging information on the product. If possible, call the hotline while en route to your emergency veterinary hospital; time is of the essence in ensuring that your dog reaches medical care immediately.
The veterinarian will start with a physical examination to assess your dog’s mental and neurological status and check for any bleeding, bruising, or abdominal pain. 
A complete blood count, serum blood chemistry with electrolytes, and urinalysis will likely be recommended for a baseline evaluation. 
Depending on the active ingredient, coagulation panels (PT/PTT) may also be recommended to check your dog’s ability to clot. Often at the time of your visit, bloodwork will appear to be normal and will need to be monitored over the next 1-7 days. Other tests such as chest or abdominal x-rays may be recommended, depending on your pet’s clinical signs.
Dogs should be treated as soon as possible for rat poisoning. Treatment will vary based on the active ingredient involved, so it is extremely important to determine the type of rat poison.
For most active ingredients, the vet will likely induce vomiting. (If the active ingredients include zinc and aluminum phosphides, the vet may induce vomiting in a well-ventilated area because of the risk to people. Activated charcoal may be given to treat other toxins.
After vomiting, treatment will depend on the specific active ingredient ingested:
Early diagnosis and aggressive treatment are crucial in treating rat poisoning in dogs. All rat poisons, regardless of the active ingredient, can be fatal, and dogs have their best chances of survival if seen quickly by a veterinarian. Overall, the prognosis is very good for dogs who receive prompt treatment upon ingesting a rodenticide. 
Most dogs will remain hospitalized for observation and treatment for 2-6 days, depending on the active ingredient and how much rat poison was ingested. Typically, blood tests will be performed several times.
Prevention is key! Keep all rat poisons away from your dog and in a secure place. Consider an alternative form of pest control, such as live traps that do not include poisons.
If you must put out rat poison:
Keep a detailed record of how much was placed
Know what kind of product (including the active ingredient)
Take a picture of the ingredients in case you need to refer to it later for veterinarian treatment
Mark where you dispensed the rat poison
If your pet is going to visit a friend, family member, or sitter, be sure to ask if they have rat poison out and keep the dog away from those areas
Never let dogs eat unidentified objects on walks, as these can include toxins and poisons and be hard to determine after the fact. Finally, remember to monitor your pet’s stool carefully, as many rodenticides contain dyes (red, green, blue, pink, and tan) that may be noticeable before severe symptoms begin.   
Sometimes it can be very difficult to determine if your dog ingested rat poison if you did not witness them eating it. However, rodenticides contain dyes (red, pink, green, blue, and tan) that can often be seen after the fact in your dog’s stool. 
Other times there are no indications until your dog becomes sick. If your pet has any of the symptoms listed above, take them to an emergency veterinary hospital immediately.  
There are four main active ingredients in rat poisons—anticoagulant rodenticide, cholecalciferol, bromethalin, and zinc and aluminum phosphides. The amount of rat poison that is lethal to dogs will depend on the size of the dog and the active ingredient. However, since rat poisons are considered highly toxic and deadly, any ingestion of rat poison means your dog should be seen immediately by a veterinarian. 
Featured Image: iStock.com/SeventyFour
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Veronica Higgs is a 2010 graduate from Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine.  She then completed a 1-year rotating...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.