Spasm of the rear legs in dogs—also called dancing Doberman syndrome because it mostly affects Doberman Pinschers—is a neuromuscular condition that causes uncontrolled flexing of the hip and of the stifle joint (similar to a human’s knee) while the dog is standing. The disease is not well understood, but it has the following characteristics:
In the early stages, a dog can usually walk and run normally but will begin to have spasms when standing. Some affected dogs will prefer sitting or lying down to standing. 
The dog will appear to be dancing but is actually alternately flexing and extending his rear legs.
Though the spasms may start with one leg, they usually progress to both rear legs within months. The front legs aren’t affected.
This condition slowly progresses to muscle weakness, knuckling of the back paws (walking on the knuckles or top of the foot), and wasting (atrophy) of the muscles in the back legs.
It affects dogs, both male and female, between the ages of 6 months and 7 years old. 
Dancing Doberman disease can resemble many other diseases and conditions, including:
Arthritis
Hip dysplasia
Intervertebral disc disease
Wobbler syndrome
Other nerve-related medical conditions
The major difference is that, with dancing Doberman disease, the dog does not seem to be in any pain.
Symptoms associated with dancing Doberman may include: 
Spasm of the muscles in the rear legs
Flexing and extending of one or both of the rear legs
Holding up a rear leg
Shifting back and forth on rear legs
Knuckling over of rear paws
Atrophy (muscle wasting) of the affected leg or legs
Weakness in the back legs
Preference for sitting or lying down instead of standing
Collapse of the rear end with advanced weakness
Not much is known at this point about the causes of the disease. There may be a genetic connection, but that has not been proven.
Diagnosing dancing Doberman disease can be difficult and frustrating since most diagnostic tests will have normal results. Vets usually make the diagnosis based on:
History
Clinical signs
Physical examination
Ruling out other diseases that may look similar
Bloodwork, which can sometimes reveal elevations in such muscle enzymes as aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and creatinine kinase (CK)
X-rays, MRI, and/or myelogram to rule out similar-looking neurologic and orthopedic conditions
Electromyography (EMG) and histopathology (biopsy) of the muscle and nerves. During an EMG, electrical currents are sent to the muscles, and returning signals from the nerves are recorded.
Unfortunately, there is no effective treatment or cure for dancing Doberman disease. Physical therapy may be attempted to maintain muscle mass, flexibility, and range of motion. The therapy may include:
Massage
Swimming
Hydrotherapy
Passive range of motion (PROM) exercises
Laser therapy (cold and hot)
Acupuncture
The last two are currently being tested in the treatment of this condition, and the results are not yet in.
The disease progresses slowly, but quality of life and life expectancy are not usually affected. Physical therapy and joint supplements should be considered for the rest of the dog’s life to avoid other bone- and joint-related issues.
Electrolyte imbalances, toxin ingestion, neurologic issues (which include dancing Doberman disease), orthopedic issues, and/or neuromuscular issues can all cause muscle spasms in your dog’s rear legs. Your vet will need to rule out possible medical conditions before diagnosing dancing Doberman disease.
Dogs with dancing Doberman disease do not seem to be in any pain. Some experts believe these dogs feel a “pins and needles” or a burning sensation down their legs, which is what causes them to shift their weight (similar to restless leg syndrome in people), but this has not been proven.
There is no cure for dancing Doberman disease, and there is no effective treatment. The good news is that there is no obvious pain associated with this condition, so there is little to no change in quality of life.
Featured Image: iStock.com/RistoArnaudov
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Katie Grzyb received her Doctorate of Veterinary Medicine from Ross University in 2009. She continued her clinical training at...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.