PetMD Editorial
Teratozoospermia is a morphological (referring to form and structure) reproductive disorder characterized by the presence of spermatozoal abnormalities. That is, 40 percent or more of the sperm are abnormally shaped. The sperm may have short or curled tails, double heads, or head that are too large, too small, or badly shaped.
The effect of specific abnormalities on fertility is largely unknown, but optimal fertility is expected in dogs that have at least 80 percent morphologically normal spermatozoa. Therefore, it is known that it is nearly impossible for sperm that are abnormally shaped to fertilize an egg.
This condition can affect dogs of any age, but older dogs are more likely to have other age-related diseases or conditions that affect overall sperm quality. There is no breed predilection, however, Irish wolfhounds have been reported to have significantly lower semen quality than dogs of other breeds.
Spermatozoal abnormalities are sometimes classified into primary and secondary defects. Primary defects occur during spermatogenesis, the development stage, and secondary defects occur during transport and storage within the epididymis (part of the spermatic duct system). Often there are no outward symptoms of this disorder. The most obvious symptom makes itself apparent in the breeding dog, when the male dog fails to impregnate a breeding partner.
Congenital
Acquired
You will need to give your veterinarian a thorough history of your dog's health, along with any possible incidents that might have led to this condition, such as trauma, infection, or travel (as other climates, especially hot climates, may have played a role).
A history of your dog’s infertility will help your veterinarian to make a diagnosis. For example, has he been infertile after appropriately timed mating to several reproductively-proven bitches? Have spermatozoal abnormalities been found during routine breeding soundness evaluation? Your veterinarian will probably do a hormonal profile as well as an examination of the ejaculates (the sperm cells). Your doctor will also test for bacterial infections, and may use visual diagnostic tools to examine the reproductive tract. An ultrasound examination may show whether there is a blockage, orchitis (inflammation of the testis), hydrocele, hemorrhage into a cavity, cyst of the epididymus, or tumor in the testicular region that is affecting the sperm ducts and sperm morphology.

There is no a specific treatment for spermatozoal abnormalities; if applicable, the underlying disease or condition will be treated. Antibiotics and anti-inflammatory agents will be prescribed for infectious diseases and swelling due to inflammation. Unilateral surgical removal may be recommended for unilateral testicular tumors or severe orchitis. Your veterinarian may recommend sexual rest for edema (swelling) or for a cyst associated with trauma. Frequent semen collection may temporarily improve sperm quality in dogs with idiopathic teratozoospermia, but the quality of the sperm will have to be tested before it is used for breeding purposes, to avoid genetic abnormalities resulting from poor sperm. If your dog is in an extremely hot environment, or it is the summer season, protect your dog from high ambient temperatures by moving him to a cooler space. In addition, alter your dog’s exercise program to reduce heat stress, unless your veterinarian has specifically ordered more exercise for treatment of obesity.
It may help to provide a climate-controlled environment for your dog if it is not adapted to high environmental temperatures. Also, avoid heat exhaustion during exercise or grooming (e.g., drying cages).
If an underlying cause is identified and treated, your veterinarian will want to perform a sperm evaluation at 30 and 60 days after the condition is resolved. In cases due to reversible causes, a complete improvement in sperm morphology does not usually occur before 60 days -- the approximate length of a complete spermatogenic cycle. 
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.