PetMD Editorial
Teeth discoloration is any variation from normal tooth color. However, the normal color of teeth varies, dependent on the shade, thickness, and translucency of the enamel covering the tooth.
Any variation from normal tooth color is discoloration. The normal color of teeth varies, dependent on the shade, thickness and translucency of the enamel covering the tooth. Extrinsic discoloration occurs when exogenous pigment accumulates on the surface of teeth. That is, the cause of the discoloration is from an external source, rather than from a physical condition. Intrinsic discoloration is characterized by secondary factors that are happening inside the tooth, discoloring the underlying dentin.
Intrinsic discoloration is characterized by secondary factors that are happening inside the tooth, discoloring the underlying dentin. Extrinsic discoloration, meanwhile, occurs when exogenous pigment accumulates on the surface of teeth. That is, the cause of the discoloration is from an external source, rather than from a physical condition. Common symptoms associated with both discoloration types include:
Extrinsic discoloration
Intrinsic discoloration
A complete blood profile will be conducted, including a chemical blood profile, a complete blood count, and a urinalysis. You will need to give a thorough history of your dog's health, onset of symptoms, and possible conditions that might have caused this condition, such as diet, injury, recent illnesses, etc. The history you provide may give your veterinarian clues to the origin of the dental condition.
An oral exam is part of a thorough physical exam. Your veterinarian will need to x-ray your dog's teeth in order to identify internal or external resorption, and whether restorative materials or bacterial stain from bacteria are entering the crown of the teeth. Your veterinarian may also use a strong fiber optic light that is focused on the teeth to determine vital from dead dental pulp (the nerves and blood vessels in the tooth). If the tooth (or teeth) need to be removed, your veterinarian will most likely need to subdue your dog with general anesthetize in order to extract it.

Extrinsic stain removal can be performed for cosmetic reasons. These procedures often involve internal and/or external treatments such as bleaching, veneers and crowns.
Intrinsic stain removal may be done to improve the function of the teeth and to relieve pain for your dog. This often involves using endodontic treatment (endodontics treat the interior of the tooth, pulp and surrounding tissue of the teeth). Crowns and veneers may be used to protect the teeth and the pulp in the teeth.
Any discolored teeth should be treated to prevent plaque and calculus buildup and to prevent further periodontal disease. Discolored teeth are more prone to fracture, which could result in tooth abscessation (formation of an abscess, usually in response to bacterial infection).
Discoloration may be prevented in future litters by avoiding giving certain medications to the pregnant bitch. With proper attention, discoloration of teeth can be prevented in puppies.
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.