PetMD Editorial
Ureterolithiasis is a condition involving the formation of stones that may lodge into and block a dog's ureter, the muscular tube that connects the kidney to the bladder and carries urine from kidneys to the bladder. Typically, the stones originate in the kidneys and pass down into the ureter.
Depending on the size and shape of the stone, the stone may pass down to the bladder without any resistance or it may partially or completely obstruct the ureter, resulting in the dilatation of the upper portion of the ureter and subsequent kidney damage.
There are a number of different types of stones found in animals and type of stone may vary in according to breeds, age, and sex of the dog.
Some dogs with ureterolithiasis display no symptoms, especially during the initial stages. Otherwise, be attentive to the following symptoms:
The underlying cause may vary depending on the type of the stone. Typical causes include:
Your veterinarian will conduct a complete medical history and perform a physical examination on your dog. He or she will then use routine laboratory tests including complete blood count, biochemistry profile, electrolyte panel, and urinalysis to assess the condition of your dog and severity of the disease. These tests also help in evaluating your pet for any other concurrent disease or condition.
Abdominal X-rays are extremely useful in visualizing the stones and their size; it will also confirm if the kidney has become enlarged as a result of the stones. Similarly, X-rays will depict if the ureter is intact or ruptured. In some cases, a special dye is injected intravenously and X-rays are taken afterward. This helps better visualize the stones by providing contrast. Ultrasound scans is another method for detecting ureter stones and kidney size.

Removing the obstructing stones is the primary objective of treatment. Fortunately, advances in modern technology has enabled veterinarians to remove the stones without surgery. A new technique called extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy  removes stones located in kidney, ureter, or bladder by producing shockwaves that break apart the stones, which can then be passed through the urine. Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy technique does not work for all animals, so consult with your veterinarian if it is right for your dog.
For dogs in which surgery is necessary, intravenous fluids are administered to maintain them hydrated. Antibiotics are also prescribed for dogs with concurrent urinary tract infection.
As relapses are common, continuous monitoring of the dog's condition is necessary. Typically, followup evaluations are done every 3-6 months. Depending on the type of stone, your veterinarian will suggest dietary changes to prevent future episodes of stone formation. If your dog is not tolerating the dietary changes well, contact him or her for necessary changes.
The overall prognosis is highly variable depending on the type of the stones.
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.