Michal Krakowiak/E+ via Getty Images
Dogs experience a wide range of emotions throughout their lives—just like people do. These emotions are shaped by life experiences or health concerns that affect how they think, feel, and act.
For example, dogs may become depressed due to an underlying health issue or because of a sudden change in their home, such as the loss of a family member.
Depression is a change in a dog’s mood, resulting in decreased interest in activities and overall sadness.
While dog depression is not considered a medical emergency, it should never be ignored. If your otherwise happy dog suddenly becomes withdrawn or simply seems unlike himself, it’s important to visit a veterinarian to identify the cause.
If your dog seems depressed and has completely stopped eating, is vomiting, is partaking in destructive behaviors, or is extremely lethargic, take your pup to an emergency veterinarian.
Depressed dogs may display the following symptoms:
Decreased interest in activities
Sad, droopy eyes
Ears pulled back
Hiding or withdrawing
Whimpering
Howling
Clinging to pet parent
Low energy
Restlessness
Decreased appetite
Changes in sleep
Dog depression can develop for a variety of reasons, which can include medical issues, environmental factors, or behavioral concerns.
A major cause of depression is underlying disease.
Dogs who feel unwell, especially those who have chronic health conditions like diabetes, may experience a general feeling of sadness.
Dogs who have chronic pain due to conditions such as arthritis are also more likely to develop depression.
Changes in the dog’s environment may also contribute to a depressive episode. This may include:
Moving homes
A death in the family
A new baby
Work schedule changes
Family conflict
Sometimes, adding a new furry family member can leave the first pet feeling depressed.
Dogs who don’t receive enough mental stimulation throughout the day can become bored, which can lead to depression. Most dogs need regular exercise throughout the day to remain healthy and happy.
Lastly, dogs who are anxious can become fearful and avoidant.
Possible triggers include:
Storms
Strangers
Loud noises
New environments
Loneliness
These behavioral changes can lead to depression in dogs.
While there’s no simple test to diagnose depression in dogs, veterinarians can speak with the pet parent about what behavioral changes are occurring in their dog and rule out other conditions that may be contributing factors.
A veterinarian may ask the pet parent if there have been any recent changes to the home environment, what concerning symptoms the dog is experiencing, and if the dog has lost interest in activities he used to enjoy.
A complete physical exam will be done to identify obvious abnormalities that could indicate a medical condition.
Full blood work and a urinalysis can provide the veterinarian with a picture of the dog’s overall health and identify underlying diseases that could be causing depression.
Some dogs may benefit from a consultation with a veterinary behaviorist who can identify depression and offer guidance on next steps.
Many dogs with depression quickly feel better once the cause has been identified and treated. Management options for depressed dogs include:
Treat the underlying medical issue: If the dog is unwell or has a chronic disease, treatment should be focused on the illness. By making the dog feel better, his overall mood should improve.
Manage chronic pain: Dogs with chronic pain, such as seniors with arthritis, benefit from pain management and joint supplements to manage their conditions. Orthopedic dog beds are also beneficial to help cushion their joints.
Increase mental stimulation: Dogs who are bored and do not receive enough mental stimulation may become depressed. Offering more walks, games of fetch, and puzzle toys can help boost a dog’s mood. 
Use medical management: Some dogs may require anti-anxiety medications, like fluoxetine, to help control their symptoms. Before you decide to begin this type of treatment, consult with a veterinary behaviorist.
Recovery from dog depression largely depends on the cause.
In many cases, the dog simply needs time. This is especially true for dogs experiencing sudden home changes, such as the loss of a family member or a new baby.
The dog needs time to adjust to his new normal, and the exact amount of time that takes varies greatly among each individual dog.
If the depression was caused by a medical issue, treatment generally resolves a dog’s depression in days or weeks.
However, dogs with chronic conditions may experience recurrent bouts of depression over time that must be managed by you and your vet, sometimes with the added help of  a veterinary behaviorist.
It’s important to remember that each individual dog will handle stressors uniquely and may experience depression differently.
Working with a veterinarian is the best way to start your dog on the path to recovery.
There are steps you can take to reduce the risk of dog depression. Most importantly, ensuring your dog receives regular veterinary care will identify health issues early so they can be treated before depression develops.
Providing your dog with enough mental stimulation throughout the day is important in keeping his mood up and preventing depressive episodes.
Regular walks, socialization, and training are helpful.
Managing anxiety and comforting your dog through major life transitions or changes in the home environment is important. All of these changes can be overwhelming for your dog.
If you anticipate a stressful event that may affect your pup, speaking with a veterinarian ahead of time can equip you with the tools needed to best support your furry companion.
If you think your dog is depressed, schedule a veterinary appointment to determine if there is an underlying illness or chronic condition that’s a contributing factor and may need management.
Once medical concerns are ruled out, encouraging activity and exercise can help cheer up a depressed dog.
Always follow your veterinarian’s instructions as to what is safe for your individual dog.
Mental stimulation is important for depressed dogs.
Daily walks, games of fetch, puzzle toys, and socialization with other pets and people can boost a dog’s mood.
If you are unsure how to safely encourage your depressed dog to eat, speak with your veterinarian.
They may recommend changing the food, adding lean chicken, or in some cases, giving an appetite stimulant.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Brittany Kleszynski is a veterinarian and freelance medical writer who specializes in creating meaningful content that engages readers...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.