PetMD Editorial
Gallbladder mucocele causes obstruction of the gallbladder's storage capacity due to the formation of a thick, mucoid bile mass inside the gallbladder, impairing its ability to function. The accumulated bile may extend the gallbladder, resulting in necrotizing cholecystitis – tissue death due to inflammation of the gallbladder. 
Gallbladder mucocele is common among middle-aged to older dogs, particularly Shetland sheepdogs, cocker spaniels and miniature schnauzers, and is not gender-specific. 
Gallbladder mucocele may be symptomatic or asymptomatic (without symptoms). The general symptoms are:
The determining diagnosis of gallbladder mucocele will be based on the distinctive conditions that would cause abnormal functioning (dysmotility) of the gallbladder. Some of the possible factors responsible for bile blockage (stasis) are neoplasia (tumor growth), pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas), and choleliths (gallstones), amongst other observed causes. 
Diagnosis is made through blood biochemistry, hematology, lab tests and imaging studies. The common observations are:
Biochemistry
Hematology/CBC
Lab tests
Imaging

Gallbladder mucocele treatment depends on the condition of the patient. Outpatients are generally put on anti-inflammatory and liver protecting agents like ursodeoxycholic acid and S-Adenosylmethionine (SAM-e). Inpatients are treated according to imaging and ultrasound results. Patients with higher lipids are restricted from fat-rich foods. If inflammation of the abdominal lining (bile peritonitis) is confirmed, abdominal cleansing (lavage) is recommended. All patients should be put on hydration therapy to correct fluid and electrolyte imbalances.
Other than broad-spectrum antimicrobials, depending on symptoms, the patients are put on anti-emetics, antacids, gastroprotectants, Vitamin K1 and antioxidant medications. After the treatment, all gallbladder mucocele patients must be periodically monitored with biochemistry, hematology and imaging studies to exclude/include various complications like cholangitis or cholangiohepatitis, bile peritonitis and EHBDO.
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.