PetMD Editorial
Gastrointestinal reflux, or acid reflux, is one of the most common causes of esophagitis, the term applied to inflammation of the esophagus in dogs. Acid reflux is the result of stomach acids passing into the esophageal canal, causing irritation to the tissue lining of the esophagus, the muscular tube that carries food down from the mouth cavity to the stomach.
Young dogs born with congenital esophageal abnormalities are at an increased risk for esophagitis. Older dogs that are being treated with anesthesia for surgery, or for other reasons, may also develop this condition. One of the most important complications of esophagitis is aspiration pneumonia, which occurs due to the entrance of food particles or liquid drops into lungs.
Your veterinarian will examine your dog thoroughly after taking a full history from you. You will need to give your veterinarian as much information as you can about your dog's health, including the onset of symptoms, and any possible incidents that might have preceded this condition.
Routine laboratory testing will include a complete blood count, biochemistry profile, and a urinalysis, though these tests usually return as normal in such patients. However, in cases of pneumonia, changes related to the infection may be seen in laboratory results. Radiographic studies, including X-ray or ultrasound imaging, may help in the diagnosis of esophagitis. An advanced type of radiography called barium contrast radiography may reveal changes in the esophagus due to inflammation. In barium contrast radiography, barium sulfate is administered orally to the dog. The particles are suspended in the esophagus, making the esophageal canal easier to visualize on X-ray.
Endoscopy is also an option for diagnosis in these patients and is often a more reliable procedure for diagnosis of esophagitis. Endoscopy is an internal diagnostic tool which uses an endoscope, a rigid but flexible tube equipped with a camera and methods for retrieving tissue samples, that can be inserted into a hollow cavity, such as the esophagus. Using this method, your veterinarian can look directly into the esophagus in order to visually inspect it, to take pictures, and to take a sample for biopsy.
Endoscopy may also be used to remove a foreign body, if required.

If gastrointestinal reflux is the cause of the esophagitis, your veterinarian will treat the cause and the symptoms to reduce their amount and frequency, and also to prevent the esophagus from narrowing in response to the stress and trauma.
If your dog is found to have a case of mild esophagitis it may be treated as an outpatient and will not likely need to be admitted into hospital. However, if your dog is suffering from complications like pneumonia, it will need to be admitted into hospital for intensive care and treatment. Fluids will be required for patients suffering from dehydration, and oxygen will be supplemented until your dog's breathing has improved and it is out of danger. Antibiotics are often required to treat pneumonia in affected patients, but this is not always the case.
Your veterinarian may recommend withholding water and food for a few days. While your dog is recovering, there are various methods for giving nutrition, including intravenous nutrition.
When your dog is able to ingest food again, a soft, palatable and highly nutritious food is recommended. Follow up progress checkups are an important part of after care, and endoscopy examinations are usually performed to verify that the esophagus is healing properly. The prognosis for affected animals is good if the esophagitis is recognized and treated promptly and aggressively. However, if the condition has progressed to the point that the esophagus has formed a stricture (narrowing), the prognosis is usually very poor.
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.