PetMD Editorial
Vaginal hyperplasia and prolapse refers to a mass which protrudes from the vaginal area. The condition is similar in nature to fluid-filled tissue (edema). If serious, it can prevent normal urination. Vaginal hyperplasia affects dogs of all ages, although it is found more commonly in younger animals. The outcome is positive for most animals, but the chance of the condition recurring is high.
Type 1 hyperplasia occurs when there is a slight protrusion, even though it does not exit the vulva itself. Type 2 hyperplasia, on the other hand, is when the vaginal tissue actually protrudes through the vulvar opening. While Type 3 hyperplasia refers to the donut-shaped mass, which can be seen externally.
There are several signs that may be noticed with this medical disorder, including the licking of the vaginal area, unwillingness to copulate, and painful urination (dysuria).
This disorder can affect almost any breed. But these breeds are more likely to suffer from the condition: Labradors, Chesapeake Bay Retrievers, German Shepherds, Springer Spaniels, Walker Hounds, Airedale Terriers, and American Pit Bull Terriers.
Upon physical examination, a round mass may be noticed protruding the animal's vulvar area. A vaginal examination will be performed to determine the severity and type of the condition. To the touch, the animal's tissue may feel dry.

Treatment is typically done on an outpatient basis. If there is a protruding mass, it is important to keep the area clean and watch for problems urinating, as they are common. The recurrence rate is high; 66-100% of animals will have the medical condition return after treatment.
If the animal is unable to urinate, this is a sign of a serious medical condition and should be treated immediately. The outcome for the animal is positive, but there are complications that can occur when the urethra is involved.
There are no current prevention methods for this medical condition.
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.