PetMD Editorial
Encephalitozoon cuniculi (E. cuniculi) is a protozoal parasitic infection in dogs which spreads and creates lesions on the lungs, heart, kidneys, and brain, significantly effecting their ability to function normally. This disease is also commonly called microsporidiosis, as the E. cuniculi is a parasite belonging to the species of microsporidia.
It is a relatively rare infection in dogs, and is better known for its effects on rabbit populations. Microsporidial infection appears to be acquired by the oronasal (mouth and nose) route, when an animal licks/sniffs the spore-infected urine of another animal. For this reason, animals that are kenneled are at greater risk for it. However, because microsporidia can survive for extended periods in the environment, it is reasonable to assume that almost any dog that goes outdoors is susceptible to infection.
Treatment is experimental, with supportive therapy being the most dominant treatment. In most cases infected dogs will recover fully without medical treatment, but it is often fatal when acquired by puppies (most often while developing in the womb, or while nursing). Puppies may be stillborn, or will die while young from failure to thrive.
In addition, this parasitic infection is zoonotic and therefore contagious to humans, particularly those who are immunocompromised. Sanitizing the environment is essential; a 70 percent ethanol solution should be used to clean up any infected urine and throughout the dog's living area.
Neonatal 	infection (appears around three weeks of age)
Adults
   
Your veterinarian will conduct a thorough physical exam of your dog after taking a complete history from you. You will then need to provide as much background information as possible about your dog's health and all of the symptoms leading up to the visit. If your dog has recently given birth, or you have puppies being treated, the puppies may be very small with a poor, dull-looking hair coats.
Because some dogs exhibit uncharacteristic aggression, your veterinarian may want to test for rabies and distemper as well. If your dog is an adult, it may have limited vision, complete blindness, or it may be having occasional seizures. Your veterinarian will order a chemical blood profile, a complete blood count and a urinalysis to see which organs the parasite has infected. The infectious spores can be seen in urine that has been stained to make the spores visible under a microscope.

Many dogs will completely recover by themselves if the infection has not progressed to severe kidney or brain disease. Supportive therapy can be used along with a fungicidal drug until the infection has cleared from the body. If your dog has severe brain or kidney disease it may need to be euthanized.
Avoid all urine from a dog that is sick with this disease.  If possible, you might want to opt to keep your dog at the veterinary clinic until its urine is no longer infectious. If you do keep your dog at home, make sure to keep it in an enclosed area on a slick, easy to sanitize surface. This will allow you to pour the 70 percent ethanol solution over your dog's urine to kill the spores (should it get on the floor). Disposable floor coverings and blankets/sheets may be used to help make cleanup more thorough.
Immune-compromised people are most at risk for catching this disease from their pets, so if at all possible, these people should have someone else to take care of their dogs until they are no longer infectious, or take all necessary precautions to protect themselves while caring for their pets (e.g., face masks, disposable gloves).
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.