PetMD Editorial
A vesicle, or blister, is a small, defined elevation of the outer layer of the skin (known as the epidermis). It is filled with serum, the clear watery fluid that separates from the blood.  A pustule is also a small, defined elevation of the outer layer of the skin (epidermis), but is filled with pus -- a mixture of serum, white blood cells, cellular debris and dead tissue.
Vesiculo refers to vesicles; this prefixed form is attached to the diseased condition that is concurrent with the cause of the blister. Pustular refers to an organism that is covered in pustules. Dermatoses is the plural form of dermatosis, which is used to describe any abnormality or disorder of the skin.
One or more of the following signs may be present:
Vesicles
Pustules
You will need to give a thorough history of your dog's health, including a background history of symptoms, and possible incidents that might have precipitated this condition. Your veterinarian will perform a thorough physical exam on your dog, with a blood chemical profile, a complete blood count, an electrolyte panel and a urinalysis.
The physical exam will include a dermatologic exam during which skin biopsies for histopathology can be taken. Skin scrapings should also be examined microscopically and cultured for bacteria, mycobacteria and fungi.

Most dogs may be treated on an outpatient basis. However, patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), pemphigus vulgaris, and bullous pemphigoid may have advanced to the point of severe illness and will require inpatient intensive care.
Ask your veterinarian if your dog might benefit from periodic bathing with an antimicrobial shampoo to help remove surface debris and control secondary bacterial infections.  Your veterinarian will schedule follow-up appointments for your dog to check bloodwork.  Initially, these follow-up appointments might be as often as every 1-2 weeks.  Later, the visits may be tapered off to once every three to four months depending on how your dog responds to the medication.
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.