Erica Puisis
MightyPics/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
When chilly temperatures set in, don’t overlook the importance of keeping your dog safe and comfortable. Even with a furry coat, dogs still need help keeping warm in winter.
Of course, some dog breeds are better suited to cold weather, like those with a double coat that provides insulation against the elements. However, other dog breeds can’t tolerate the cold because of their coat type, size, body structure, or other characteristics.
Here are the dog breeds that are most vulnerable to cold weather conditions.
A hairless Chinese Crested has little defense against cold weather, with just tufts of hair on the head, feet, and tail.
These petite and fine-boned dogs won’t tolerate cold temperatures well and should wear a dog coat outside when the temperature drops. Chinese Cresteds can benefit from wearing a light layer of doggy clothing inside, too, if your home is drafty.
Due to their small size, Chihuahuas are prone to getting cold quickly. Maturing to a weight of less than 6 pounds, these pups are well suited for the warm climate of their Mexican homeland.
Chihuahuas can lose body heat rapidly when the temperature plummets, so it’s important to minimize cold weather exposure. Fortunately, the small size of this breed makes it easy for them to exercise indoors.
Hailing from Africa, the short-haired Basenji is best known for their coiled tail and unique yodel. These dogs are athletic and energetic, making outdoor activities like running, hiking, and agility excellent ways to challenge their mind and body.
But very cold weather can put a damper on these outdoor activities, and the Basenji’s short, fine coat won’t insulate the dog against freezing temperatures for very long.
Frenchies don’t do well with hot weather because of their short muzzle, which makes it harder for them to regulate their body temperature. But this flat-faced dog breed can’t tolerate cold weather very well, either.
That’s because French Bulldogs have a short, thin coat that doesn’t provide much insulation when the temperature drops. A dog sweater or jacket can provide some protection, but it’s best to avoid prolonged outdoor activities with a Frenchie in extreme weather, whether hot or cold.
Capable of blazing fast speeds, the Greyhound has a lean physique with very little body fat and a very thin coat that allows for rapid heat dissipation. While these features make these dogs track stars, they’re less suited for cold weather conditions.
Keep outdoor exposure brief when temperatures are below freezing, and don’t be surprised if your Greyhound needs a layer of clothing to stay warm.
The Italian Greyhound looks like a petite version of the Greyhound, and the two breeds share many physical characteristics, including a slender body and a short, thin coat. Based on those factors, this toy breed doesn’t fare well in cold weather and must be protected from freezing temperatures outside and drafty conditions inside.
Italian Greyhounds are known to be affectionate lap dogs, so don’t be surprised if they snuggle up to you even more when the weather turns chilly. 
The lanky Whippet is built for speed and is closely related to the Greyhound. The breed has a short coat, thin skin, and very little body fat, so there’s not much to insulate against cold weather.
When the weather takes a turn, Whippets need protection from the elements, including warm clothing and perhaps even doggy boots to protect their paw pads from ice.
The Pug is a popular flat-faced dog breed, but that short muzzle makes the breed more susceptible to breathing issues and prone to overheating. But cold weather outings also need to be kept short, as Pugs have a short coat that doesn’t provide much protection against the cold.
Because Pugs aren’t known for being overly energetic, a short burst of indoor play during inclement weather is usually OK.
A Yorkshire Terrier is a pint-sized companion that weighs less than 10 pounds but has a big personality. Their spirited and energetic nature makes these dogs naturally curious and up for adventure, but their small size means they shouldn’t be exposed to cold temperatures for very long, or they could be at risk for hypothermia. 
The small size and short coat of the Miniature Pinscher mean this breed can’t tolerate cold weather very well at all. Reaching no more than about 12 inches tall and 10 pounds in weight, these small dogs are prone to losing body heat rapidly—especially with just a smooth, thin coat of hair covering their body.
When the weather turns cold, you’ll need to rely on interactive indoor activities to tire out a Min Pin’s body and mind.
WRITTEN BY
Erica Puisis
Freelance Writer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.