Nataba/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
We normalize “doggy breath,” but that smell can actually be a sign of disease. 
Bad breath in dogs comes from an overgrowth of bacteria releasing foul-smelling compounds that can damage the gums. The gums can become inflamed as gingivitis develops, eventually leading to periodontal disease.
Fortunately, gingivitis is preventable and reversible.
The best way to prevent dental disease is having your pets’ teeth regularly cleaned and examined by your veterinarian. This cleaning removes plaque and tartar above and below the gumline, treating gingivitis and giving your dog better breath.
Let’s look at how much dog dental cleaning costs and why dog dental cleanings are so important.
Dog teeth cleaning costs vary throughout in the United States.
Dog dental cleaning costs depend on a few factors, including:
The services provided (for example, dog tooth extractions increase the cost of your cleaning). 
Who is providing the service (a veterinarian or a veterinary dentist).
Both general practitioner veterinarians and board-certified veterinary dentists can provide proper dentistry care to your pup.
Veterinary dentists—who are members of the American Veterinary Dental College—are veterinarians who underwent a multi-year residency with full-time training in:
Dentistry
Pain management
X-ray interpretation
CT interpretation
Anesthesia
This allows veterinary dentists to provide your dog with the best care.
Dog teeth cleanings with extractions with general practitioners can cost as much as $1,500. Price may vary based on their advanced training, specialty and equipment of the practice.
A typical exam with X-rays and cleanings can cost up to $2,000–$3,000.
The following will make dog dental cleanings increase in price:
Nerve blocks (local anesthesia, or numbing agent, given in various locations within the mouth to prevent or block pain and facilitates teeth extraction)
Extractions
Pain medications
Advanced imaging such as CTs
Root canals (a procedure where inner contents—such as nerve and blood vessel—of the tooth are removed and replaced with a dental material so that the tooth can be saved instead of extracted)
You may seek out or be referred to a veterinary dentist if your dog:
Has underlying health issues
Needs a root canal
Requires cancer removal
Has a less-common disease (dentigerous cyst, retained tooth roots, broken jaw)
Has advanced anesthesia needs
The cost of dog teeth cleaning typically includes:
Anesthesia: The dog is safely placed under anesthesia via sedation and a tracheal breathing tube is positioned.
Anesthesia is the safest method for keeping water out of the airway, is not stressful or painful, and allows for complete exam and treatment.
Oral exam: A tooth-by-tooth exam is done, which includes measuring the gum pocket for periodontal health; checking for fractured teeth, cavities, and loose teeth; and performing an intraoral exam, evaluating the soft tissues of the mouth (tongue, palate, and back of the throat looking for ulcers and masses).
Scaling and polishing: Scaling removes plaque and tartar above and below the gum line and is always followed by polishing to smooth the surface of the teeth.
Dental X-rays: Dental X-rays show the tooth roots, the bone and tissue around the roots, the pulp canal inside the tooth, and the jaw bones.
It’s best practice to always recommend dental x-rays at every teeth cleaning to evaluate the entirety of the tooth; dental x-rays should always be taken before and after every tooth extraction.
However, they are necessary to fully assess the teeth, as they can show your veterinarian any evidence of:
Bone loss
Dead teeth
Oral cancers
Infections
Cysts
Taking X-rays before and after dental extractions is the standard of care. The time it adds to anesthesia is insignificant compared to the benefit it provides. 
Prior to anesthesia, your veterinarian will do a blood panel on your pet to assess internal organ function, red and white blood cells, and platelet counts.
This blood work may or may not be included in the dental cleaning and ranges from $75–$200.
If teeth are too diseased to be saved and are a source of inflammation or discomfort to your pet, they will be extracted at an extra cost ($500–$2,500 per tooth).
The additional costs of tooth extraction depend on tooth size, type of extraction needed, the number of teeth that need to be removed, and the time needed for surgery.
Speak with your veterinarian about what is and isn't included in the cost of your dog's teeth cleaning. 
Some hospitals offer plans that cover teeth cleaning but only the cleaning and anesthesia itself will be covered. Any teeth extraction, X-rays, pain medications, or antibiotics may incur additional charges.
Other hospitals may charge a lump sum per dental cleaning which includes the cleaning, anesthesia, X-rays, and extractions, if necessary.
Not all pet insurance policies will cover dental costs.
If your pet was diagnosed with dental disease prior to acquiring the policy, the procedure could be excluded as a pre-existing condition.
Root canals and extractions can also vary from policy to policy.
Be sure to know your coverage prior to scheduling a dental procedure, as most policies do not reimburse pet parents until after the procedure.
Learn about CarePlus, insurance plans with exclusive Chewy benefits
Pet insurance that can cover Rx costs and more
Yes!
If left untreated, dental disease can lead to devastating consequences including systemic illness.  
Dental disease is a significant problem in pets and a leading cause of disease in our furry companions; in fact, in a study conducted in 2023, dental-related disease was diagnosed in 73% of dogs and 64% of cats. 
Dental cleaning procedures can not only prevent these diseases from occurring but can also limit them. And, at times, reverse their progression—leading to a better quality of life.
The American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) recommends a dog’s first dental cleaning should be when they’re 1-2 years old for small- and medium-size dogs and 2-3 years old for large dogs.
Small dogs need a cleaning every year.
Their small mouths are prone to gingivitis and dental disease because of crowding (dogs have 42 teeth in those little mouths).
Brachycephalic dogs (flat-face breeds like Pugs, French Bulldogs, and Boston Terriers) also are prone to more advanced disease due to their abnormal bites and crowded teeth.
Larger dogs can usually have a year and a half to two years between cleanings. However, they still need to have their mouths examined at yearly checkups.
Signs that your dog needs a professional cleaning include:
Bad breath
Bleeding, redness, or swelling of the gums
Having a hard time picking up food or decreased appetite
Dropping food while eating
Loose teeth
Teeth chattering
Let's look at a few tips on how to save on dog teeth cleanings and prevent future dental problems in your pup.
Starting dental cleanings when your pup is young is a long-term investment both financially and for his oral health.
It’s safer (and cheaper) in the long run to have multiple dental cleanings than to have an expensive procedure on an older animal needing extensive treatment.
Don’t be afraid to ask your veterinarian at the yearly exam when your pet is due.
If your pet has yearly blood work evaluated, try to time the dental procedure in the same month to avoid an additional blood test cost.
You can lengthen the time between dog dental cleanings (and save money!) by brushing your dog’s teeth. If your dog won’t tolerate a toothbrush, there are options such as dental diets, chews, sprays, and water additives that can help keep his teeth clean and healthy.
If you are shopping for pet insurance, find out what the dental coverage is or if it will be excluded as a pre-existing condition in an older pet. Every policy offers different benefits.
Some veterinarians offer discounts in February for Pet Dental Health Month or include cleanings in yearly wellness plans. Your veterinarian may work with third-party financing options as well.
Anesthesia-free or “awake” dental cleanings do not treat dental disease and are not safe for pets. 
They may be cheaper, but they do not remove plaque or tartar under the gumline, can’t treat disease, and are stressful for your pet.
The AAHA and AVDC do not recommend or endorse these procedures, and the short-term appeal of a cheaper fee will cost you and your pet in the long run.
Daily brushing of your dog’s teeth is recommended.
Using a dog-safe toothbrush and toothpaste (one that appeals to your dog’s tastebuds which helps increase compliance) and a lot of patience, you will eventually be successful.
Dividing the mouth into quadrants (top left, top right, bottom left, bottom right) can help form an easy-to-remember routine while focusing solely on the outside surfaces of your dog's teeth. 
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
 Dr. Mallory Kanwal is from Ohio and went to The Ohio State University for her undergraduate degree and then to attend veterinary school....
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.