StefaNikolic/E+ via Getty Images
When you or a family member have mild to moderate pain associated with a headache, arthritis, or a muscle strain, do you reach for ibuprofen?
A lot of people do—it’s inexpensive, and available almost everywhere. But what should you do when your dog is in pain?
As a pet parent, it’s normal to ask, “Can you give dogs ibuprofen?”
Let’s look at ibuprofen and why you should never give it to your dog.
Dogs should never be given ibuprofen. Ibuprofen is toxic to dogs.
If your dog is in pain, is limping or feels feverish, take him to the veterinarian. There are much safer alternatives with less adverse effects that are still affordable. 
If ingested, ibuprofen can cause a dog to become poisoned. Dogs may also vomit blood, develop acute kidney failure, seize, and die.
If your dog ingests any amount of ibuprofen, seek emergency care immediately.
The ASPCA™ National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-4435.  
Additionally, the Pet Poison Helpline® can be reached at 855-764-7661. 
For a nominal fee, both services can calculate the toxic dose and guide therapy options for you and your veterinarian.
Ibuprofen is the generic name for a particular type of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID). It’s an active ingredient in many different brand name medications, including Advil®, Midol®, and Motrin®.
There are many different types of NSAIDs. The NSAIDs designed for human use include aspirin, naproxen (Aleve®), and ibuprofen.
While acetaminophen (Tylenol®) is often thought of being in the same category as these other medications, Tylenol® is not an NSAID and works in a different way.
Ibuprofen works by blocking the activity of an enzyme called cyclooxygenase (COX), which reduces inflammatory molecules called prostaglandins.
In addition to promoting inflammation and pain, prostaglandins have beneficial functions, such as:
Maintaining adequate blood flow to the kidneys
Helps protect the digestive tract
Allowing blood to clot normally
When these functions are blocked by ibuprofen or another NSAID, problems can follow.
Cyclooxygenase comes in two forms, COX-1 and COX-2, but only COX-1 has a beneficial role in blood clotting, maintenance of blood flow to the kidneys, and gastrointestinal (GI) tract protection.
Unfortunately, over-the-counter NSAIDs like ibuprofen, aspirin, and naproxen are non-selective, so when they are given, they block the activity of both COX-1 and COX-2.    
As a result, stomach ulceration and inflammation occur with symptoms such as vomiting (with or without blood), diarrhea, and lack of appetite. 
At higher doses, acute kidney failure ensues followed by coma, depression, and seizures.
This, combined with the fact that dogs metabolize and excrete NSAIDs differently than people, means that even relatively low doses of ibuprofen can lead to life-threatening side effects‚ including death.
Because over-the-counter NSAIDs are associated with serious side effects in dogs, drug companies have put a lot of effort into finding dog-safe medications that block pain, inflammation, and fever while leaving the other prostaglandin functions intact.
NSAIDs that do this can reduce the chances of side effects while still providing relief from pain, inflammation, and fever.
Many NSAIDs have been designed specifically for dogs, including:
Deracoxib (Deramaxx™)
Carprofen (Rimadyl®)
Etodolac (EtoGesic®)
Meloxicam (Metacam®)
Firocoxib (Previcox®)
These drugs are safer and more effective for dogs than are over-the-counter pain relievers for humans like ibuprofen.
No drug is completely without risk, however. All types of NSAIDs, including those designed for dogs, have been associated with the potential to cause side effects like:
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Poor appetite
Lethargy
Gastrointestinal ulceration
Kidney dysfunction
Liver damage
Here are some ways you can protect your dog:
Follow your veterinarian’s recommendations with regards to lab work and rechecks.
Give the lowest dose as infrequently as possible that keeps your dog comfortable. Combining NSAIDs with other forms of treatment (weight loss, physical therapy, nutritional supplements, and acupuncture, for example) will often help.
Don’t use two NSAIDs at the same time or an NSAID in combination with a corticosteroid like prednisone. Doing so greatly increases the risk of side effects.
To reduce the chances that drugs will interact badly, take five to seven days off between NSAIDs when switching from one type to another.
Even though ibuprofen is cheap and effective for people, there are much better (and safer) options available for relieving your dog’s discomfort.
Talk to your veterinarian to determine what pain relief medication is right for your pup.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Jennifer Coates is an accomplished veterinarian, writer, editor, and consultant with years of experience in the fields of veterinary...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.