Current Canine Guidelines for the
Current Canine Guidelines for the
Prevention, Diagnosis, 4
and Management of ¢ #7
BIClaNelaaaN reeeaoh | i
Infection in Dogs
P=
akerUy
HEARTWORM
SOCIETY
ZL
Prevention, Diagnosis,
and Management of
Heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis)
Infection in Dogs

Thank You to Our Generous Sponsors:
@ boyerveatncre Elanco a zZoetis
Printed with an Education Grant from IDEXX Laboratories. Photomicrographs courtesy of Bayer HealthCare.
© 2014 American Heartworm Society | PO Box 8266 | Wilmington, DE 19803-8266 | E-mail: info@heartwormsociety.org

Current Canine Guidelines for the
Prevention, Diagnosis,
and Management of
Heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis)
Infection in Dogs
(revised July 2014)
CONTENTS
Click on the links below to navigate to each section
Preamble......................................................................................................................................................................3
HIGHLIGHTS.................................................................................................................................................................3
EPIDEMIOLOGY...........................................................................................................................................................3
Figure 1. Urban heat island profile.
BIOLOGY AND LIFE CYCLE.........................................................................................................................................5
Figure 2. The heartworm life cycle.
HEARTWORM PREVENTION......................................................................................................................................6
Macrocyclic Lactones
Drugs and Other Substances that Inhibit P-Glycoproteins (box)
Reports of Lack of Efficacy
PRIMARY DIAGNOSTIC SCREENING.........................................................................................................................9
Test Timing for Optimal Results
Microfilaria and Antigen Testing
Antigen Tests
Microfilaria Tests
Figure 3. Acanthocheilonema reconditum and Dirofilaria immitis.
Testing Considerations Following Noncompliance and When Changing Products
Figure 4. The testing protocol following known Noncompliance includes three tests in the first year,
with annual testing thereafter.
OTHER DIAGNOSTIC AIDS.......................................................................................................................................12
Radiography
Figure 5. Moderate heartworm disease (radiographs).
Figure 6. Severe heartworm disease (radiographs).
Echocardiography
Figure 7. Echocardiogram.
PRE-ADULTICIDE EVALUATION...............................................................................................................................13
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
1

PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT...................................................................................................................................13
Table 1. Summary of Clinical Signs of Canine Heartworm Disease
ADULTICIDE THERAPY..............................................................................................................................................14
Melarsomine Dihydrochloride
Pulmonary Thromboembolism
ADJUNCT THERAPY..................................................................................................................................................15
Steroids
NSAIDs and Aspirin
Doxycycline
Figure 8. Pulmonary pathology associated with death of heartworms.
Macrocyclic Lactones
Figure 9. Timeline of D immitis development, showing periods of susceptibility to macrocyclic lactones and
melarsomine.
Macrocyclic Lactones/Doxycycline
AHS-RECOMMENDED PROTOCOL..........................................................................................................................17
Table 2. AHS-Recommended Protocol
SURGICAL EXTRACTION OF ADULT HEARTWORMS............................................................................................17
Caval Syndrome (Dirofilarial Hemoglobinuria)
Figure 10. Echocardiogram images.
Figure 11. Surgical removal of worms.
Pulmonary Arterial Infections
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES........................................................................................................................................19
Long-term Macrocyclic Lactone Administration
Herbal Therapies
CONFIRMATION OF ADULTICIDE EFFICACY...........................................................................................................19
ELIMINATION OF MICROFILARIAE..........................................................................................................................20
ELECTIVE SURGERIES IN DOGS WITH HEARTWORMS........................................................................................20

Prepared by Dr. C. Thomas Nelson, Dr. John W.
McCall, and Dr. Doug Carithers (Editor), and
approved by the Executive Board of the American
Heartworm Society (Officers: Dr. Stephen Jones,
President; Dr. Wallace Graham, Past President;
Dr. Cristiano von Simson, Vice President; Dr. Robert
Stannard, Secretary-Treasurer; Dr. Doug Carithers,
Editor; Dr. Patricia Payne, Dr. Chris Rehm, Dr. Charles
Thomas Nelson, Dr. Martha Smith-Blackmore,
Dr. Elizabeth Clyde, and Dr. Bianca Zaffarano, Board
Members; Dr. Matthew Miller, Symposium Chair;
Dr. Clarke Atkins, Symposium Co-Chair; Dr. John
McCall, Co-Editor; Dr. Mike Loenser and Dr. Tony
Rumschlag, Ex Officio Members.
Preamble
These recommendations supersede previous
editions and are based on the latest information
presented at the 2013 Triennial Symposium of
the American Heartworm Society (AHS), new
research, and additional clinical experience. The
recommendations for the prevention, diagnosis,
and management of heartworm infection in cats
are contained in a companion feline document
(http://heartwormsociety.org/veterinary-resources/
feline-guidelines.html).
HIGHLIGHTS
• Diagnostics: AHS recommends annual
antigen and microfilaria testing. (Because the
interpretation of diagnostics has become more
complex, please see the “Microfilaria and Antigen
Testing” section for more complete information.)
• Chemoprophylaxis: AHS recommends year-
round administration of chemoprophylactic
drugs to prevent heartworm disease, control
other pathogenic and/or zoonotic parasites, and
enhance compliance, the latter being particularly
important in light of the documented presence of
resistant subpopulations.
• Adulticide therapy: AHS recommends use of
doxycycline and a macrocyclic lactone prior to the
three-dose regimen of melarsomine (one injection
of 2.5 mg/kg body weight followed at least one
month later by two injections of the same dose 24
hours apart) for treatment of heartworm disease
in both symptomatic and asymptomatic dogs.
Any method utilizing only macrocyclic lactones as
a slow-kill adulticide is not recommended.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Heartworm infection in dogs has been diagnosed
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
As vectors expand their territory, the number
of animals infected will continue to increase. A
3
around the globe, including all 50 of the United
States. In the United States, its territories, and
protectorates, heartworm is considered at least
regionally endemic in each of the contiguous 48
states, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin Islands,
and Guam. Heartworm transmission has not been
documented in Alaska; however, there are regions
in central Alaska that have mosquito vectors and
climate conditions to support the transmission of
heartworms for brief periods. Thus, the introduction
of microfilaremic dogs or wild canids could set
up a nidus of infection for local transmission
of heartworm in this state. Such relocation of
microfilaremic dogs and expansion of the territories
of microfilaremic wild canids in other areas of the
United States continue to be important factors
contributing to further dissemination of the parasite,
as the ubiquitous presence of one or more species of
vector-competent mosquitoes makes transmission
possible wherever a reservoir of infection and
favorable climatic conditions co-exist. Change in
any of these factors can have a significant effect on
the transmission potential in a specific geographic
location.
Environmental changes, both natural climatic
change and those created by humans, and animal
movement have increased heartworm infection
potential. Commercial and residential real estate
development of non-endemic areas and areas of
low incidence has led to the resultant spread and
increased prevalence of heartworms by altering
drainage of undeveloped land and by providing
water sources in new urban homesites. In the
western United States, irrigation and planting of
trees has expanded the habitat for Aedes sierrensis
(western knot hole mosquito), the primary vector
for transmission of heartworms in those states.
Aedes albopictus (Asian tiger mosquito), which
was introduced into the Port of Houston in 1985,
has now spread northward, approaching Canada,
and isolated populations have been identified in
areas in the western states. This urban-dwelling
mosquito is able to reproduce in small containers,
such as flowerpots. Urban sprawl has led to the
formation of “heat islands,” as buildings and parking
lots retain heat during the day (Figure 1), creating
microenvironments with potential to support the
development of heartworm larvae in mosquito
vectors during colder months, thereby lengthening
the transmission season.

Rural
Commercial
Urban
Residential
Suburban
Residential
Downtown
Park
Suburban
Residental
Rural
Farmland
Figure 1. Sketch of an urban heat island profile. From http://eetd.lbl.gov/HeatIsland/HighTemps/
pivotal prerequisite for heartworm transmission is
a climate that provides adequate temperature and
humidity to support a viable mosquito population,
and also sustain sufficient heat to allow maturation
of ingested microfilariae into the infective, third-
stage larvae (L3) within this intermediate host. It
has been shown that maturation of larvae, within
three mosquito species, ceases at temperatures
below 57˚F (14˚C). Heartworm transmission does
decrease in winter months, but the presence of
microenvironments in urban areas suggests that
the risk of heartworm transmission never reaches
zero. Furthermore, some species of mosquitoes
overwinter as adults. While heartworm larval
development in these mosquitoes may cease in cool
temperatures, development quickly resumes with
subsequent warming.
The length of the heartworm transmission season
in the temperate latitudes is critically dependent
on the accumulation of sufficient heat to incubate
larvae to the infective stage in the mosquito. The
peak months for heartworm transmission in the
Northern Hemisphere are typically July and August.
Models predict that heartworm transmission in the
continental United States is limited to 6 months or
less above the 37th parallel at approximately the
Virginia–North Carolina state line. While model-
based predictions of transmission using climatic
data are academically appealing, they typically fail
to consider several potentially important factors,
such as influence of microclimate, unique biological
habits and adaptations of the mosquito vectors,
variations in time of larval development, mosquito
life expectancy, and temperature fluctuations.
Predictive risk maps assume that mosquito
4
vectors live for only one month; however, several
significant mosquito vectors live and breed for
much longer periods, including Aedes albopictus
(3 months), Aedes sticticus (3 months), Aedes
trivittatus (2 months), Aedes vexans (2 months),
and Aedes canadensis (several months). There are
also documented cases of hibernating Anopheles
quadrimaculatus surviving for 4 to 5 months, so
the predictive risk maps likely reflect a shorter
transmission season than actually exists.
Survey studies of trapped mosquitoes randomly
collected at various locations have demonstrated
heartworm infection rates in mosquitoes ranging
from 2% to 19.4% in known endemic areas. When
mosquito sampling was restricted to kennel
structures where known positive dogs were being
housed, the infection rates of the mosquitoes in
these restricted samplings resulted in rates of 30%
adjacent to and 74% inside the facilities. Based
upon these data, it is important to protect pets from
mosquito exposure. This may be accomplished
by environmental control measures, including
treatment of standing water sources with insect
growth regulators (IGRs) combined with mosquito
adulticidal measures (sprays, CO2
traps, etc.). In
addition to mosquito control, keeping pets inside
during peak mosquito hours and/or the use of
mosquito repellants on pets may also reduce the risk
of infection.
Once a reservoir of microfilaremic domestic and wild
canids is established beyond the reach of veterinary
care, the ubiquitous presence of one or more species
of vector-competent mosquitoes makes transmission
possible and eradication becomes improbable.
American Heartworm Society
Late Afternoon Temperature
wo
Co
on
2
m7

BIOLOGY AND LIFE CYCLE
The domestic dog and some wild canids are the
normal definitive hosts for heartworms and thus
serve as the main reservoir of infection. Even less
suitable hosts, such as cats and ferrets, occasionally
have low-level, transient microfilaremia and
therefore, theoretically, may serve as a limited
source of infection for mosquitoes during these short
periods of microfilaremia.
The life cycle of Dirofilaria immitis is relatively long
(usually 7 to 9 months) compared with most parasitic
nematodes (Figure 2). The susceptible mosquito
becomes infected when taking a blood meal from
a microfilaremic host. Microfilariae cannot develop
into adult heartworms without first developing into
larval stage 1 (L1) in the malpighian tubules of the
mosquito, then molting into larval stage 2 (L2), and
finally molting into an infective third-stage larva (L3).
The third-stage larvae then migrate via the body
cavity to the head and mouthparts of the mosquito,
where they become infective. The time required for
the development of microfilariae to the infective
stage in the mosquito is temperature dependent.
At 27°C and 80% relative humidity, development
takes about 10 to 14 days; with cooler temperatures
maturation takes longer.
When the mosquito takes a blood meal, the infective
larvae rupture the end of the mosquito’s labrum and
emerge within a droplet of hemolymph (mosquito
blood) on the skin of the host. Immediately after
the blood meal, these sexually differentiated larvae
enter the animal’s body via the puncture wound
made by the mosquito’s mouthparts. Apparently
L3 and L4 travel between muscle fibers during
migration, whereas juveniles (immature adults)
penetrate muscle and eventually veins, transporting
them toward the heart and lungs. The molt from
L3 to L4 begins as early as day 3 and ends as late
as days 9 to 12. L4 molt to the final stage at days
50 to 70. Immature adult (fifth stage) worms reach
the pulmonary vasculature as early as day 67 and
all have arrived by days 90 to 120. The first worms
entering the pulmonary vasculature on days 67 to 85
are 1 to 1.5 inches in length. Thereafter, adult worms
Heartworm-infected Dog
HEARTWORM
aN SOCIETY”
EST.1974
eats j microfilariae cap, live
AN
Mx. °°
ducing Microfj|
pow
q
~
YYCay,
5
ahaure Adult producjp,
we7-4 years / Microfilay;
Vey,
Infective
larvae
acquire
new host
©2014
American Heartworm Society
Wilmington, DE
Figure 2. The heartworm life cycle.
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
5

increase in length, with females increasing by almost
tenfold, becoming sexually mature about day 120
post infection. Dogs develop patent infections (i.e.,
have circulating microfilariae) as early as 6 months
but usually by 7 to 9 months after infection.
When juvenile heartworms first reach the lungs, the
flow of blood forces them into the small pulmonary
arteries. As the worms grow and increase in size,
they progressively occupy larger and larger arteries
until they become fully mature. The eventual
location of the mature adult worms appears to
depend mainly on the size of the dog and the worm
burden. A medium-sized dog (e.g., Beagle) with a
low worm burden (i.e., ≤5) usually has worms mainly
in the lobar arteries and main pulmonary artery.
As the worm burden increases, worms also can be
located in the right ventricle. Dogs with more than
40 worms are more likely to have caval syndrome,
where the worms maneuver into the right ventricle,
right atrium, and the vena cavae, thus interfering
with valvular function and/or blood flow and
producing hemolysis, liver and kidney dysfunction,
and heart failure.
A clear understanding of heartworm transmission,
development, prepatent period, and the
susceptibility of the different life stages of the
parasite to available pharmaceutical drugs is critical.
This knowledge base is necessary to effectively
select the most appropriate adulticidal treatment
option and treatment time, and to develop realistic
expectations for the veterinarian and client for the
outcome of therapy.
HEARTWORM PREVENTION
The prescription of heartworm chemoprophylactic
medication requires authorization by a licensed
veterinarian having a valid relationship with the
client and patient. To establish this relationship,
heartworm prevention should be discussed with the
client. If records of past treatment and testing do
not exist, it is necessary to test the patient before
dispensing or prescribing chemoprophylaxis.
Options for effective chemoprophylaxis include
several drugs administered monthly either orally or
topically, or parenterally at 6-month intervals.
Heartworm infection is preventable despite the
dog’s inherently high susceptibility. Because all
dogs living in heartworm-endemic areas are at
risk, chemoprophylaxis is a high priority. Puppies
should be started on chemoprophylaxis as early
as possible, no later than 8 weeks of age. Puppies
6
started on a heartworm preventive after 8 weeks
of age, or housed unprotected outdoors in heavily
endemic areas, should be tested 6 months after the
initial dose and annually thereafter. Before initiating
a preventive regimen in older dogs (7 months
of age or older), antigen and microfilaria testing
should be performed (see PRIMARY DIAGNOSTIC
SCREENING). This practice avoids delays in
detecting subclinical infections and the potential
confusion concerning effectiveness of the prevention
program if a preexisting infection becomes
evident after beginning chemoprophylaxis (e.g.,
chemoprophylaxis initiated during the prepatent
period).
Evidence strongly suggests that by reducing
the reservoir population through increasing the
number of dogs receiving chemoprophylaxis, a
disproportionately large decrease in the prevalence
of infection among unprotected dogs may occur.
This “collateral” protection spreads the umbrella of
chemoprophylaxis most effectively in communities
where heartworm prevalence and dog population
density are both relatively low.
Even though continuous, year-round transmission
may not occur throughout the country, the
administration of broad-spectrum chemoprophylactic
products with endoparasitic and/or ectoparasitic
activity for 12 months each year likely enhances
compliance and may assist in preventing pathogenic
and/or zoonotic parasitic infections.
Macrocyclic Lactones
The heartworm preventives currently marketed
(ivermectin, milbemycin oxime, moxidectin, and
selamectin) belong to the macrocyclic lactone class
of drugs. These drugs affect microfilariae, third-
and fourth-stage larvae, and in some instances
of continuous use, adult heartworms. Because
their filaricidal effect on precardiac larvae can be
achieved by brief pulsing at very low doses, they
have excellent therapeutic/toxic ratios. Macrocyclic
lactones, when given according to label instructions,
are highly effective and are among the safest
medications used in veterinary medicine.
All orally and topically administered macrocyclic
lactone chemoprophylactic products are labeled for
a 30-day dosing interval. Beyond this interval
efficacy against late fourth-stage larvae declines and
is unpredictable. Juvenile worms, which can be
found as early as 52 days post infection, are even
less susceptible to chemoprophylaxis. As worms
American Heartworm Society

age, they require progressively longer-term
administration to achieve a high level of protection.
The extended post-infection efficacy of macrocyclic
lactones is a partial safeguard in the event of
inadvertent delay or omission of regularly scheduled
doses but does not justify lengthening the
recommended one-month interval of administration
for the oral and topical formulations. The extent of
efficacy against late fourth-stage larvae and juvenile
worms has important implications for
chemoprophylaxis in dogs that have either missed
doses during the transmission season, or are
already into the transmission season before
chemoprophylaxis is started and may already be
infected. Continuous, year-round administration of
heartworm preventive is critical in most, if not all,
areas of the United States.
Some Drugs and Other Substances
That Inhibit P-Glycoproteins
Antidepressants
Fluoxetine
St. John’s Wort
Paroxetine
Antimicrobial Agents
Erythromycin
Itraconazole
Ketoconazole
Opioids
Methadone
Pentazocine
Some Collies and other P‑glycoprotein–deficient
dogs are unusually sensitive to a variety of
commonly used veterinary drugs, including
some antidepressants, antimicrobial agents,
opioids, immunosuppressants, and cardiac drugs
(see sidebar). The macrocyclic lactones are also
included in this list with toxicities being reported
with overdosing or in combination with other
P-glycoprotein–inhibiting drugs. These intoxications
have occurred most often when concentrated
livestock preparations of macrocyclic lactones are
either accidentally ingested or overdosed because of
human error in dosage calculation. This practice is
an “off-label” use of the drugs and is discouraged.
The standard chemoprophylactic dosages of all
macrocyclic lactones have been shown to be safe in
all breeds.
Oral administration: Ivermectin and milbemycin
oxime are available for monthly oral administration.
Some formulations are flavored and chewable
to increase patient acceptance and facilitate
administration. Dose units are packaged for dogs
within prescribed weight ranges. To be maximally
effective, heartworm prophylaxis should be given
year-round, but if seasonal treatment is chosen,
administration should begin at least one month prior
to the anticipated start of heartworm transmission
and, depending on the product used, may need to
be continued for up to 6 months after transmission
typically ceases (see section on Lack of Efficacy).
Topical administration: Moxidectin and selamectin
are available as topically applied liquid formulations.
The parameters for treatment with topical products
are the same as for monthly oral chemoprophylaxis.
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
Cardiac Drugs
Verapamil
Amiodarone
Quinidine
Nicardipine
Immunosuppressants
Cyclosporine
Tacrolimus
Miscellaneous
Bromocriptine
Chlorpromazine
Tamoxifen
Grapefruit juice
(Source: http://www.vetmed.wsu.
edu/depts-vcpl/drugs.aspx)
Parenteral administration: A single dose of the slow-
release (SR) formulation of subcutaneously injected
moxidectin-impregnated lipid microspheres provides
continuous protection for 6 months, with the
potential to enhance compliance. Treatment every
6 months is recommended for maximal protection.
Reports of Lack of Efficacy
Lack of efficacy (LOE) of a heartworm preventive
product is considered by the Center for Veterinary
Medicine (CVM) of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) as a dog testing heartworm
positive regardless of appropriateness of dosage or
administration consistency. There are many possible
reasons for reports of LOE, including failure to
administer sufficient preventive, failure to administer
the preventive when it should be given, failure of a
dog to retain a dose, and failure of absorption of the
active ingredient. There is also biological variation
between hosts in drug metabolism and immune
7

response, and in parasite susceptibility to the drug.
Thus, the exact cause of a reported LOE can be
difficult or impossible to determine.
Fortunately most LOE claims are explained by
compliance failure, either between the clinic and
the client or the client and the pet, rather than
product failure. It is possible for an animal to
become infected because of skipped or delayed
administration of just one preventive dose,
particularly in highly endemic areas. Such areas
typically have warm temperatures most of the year,
an abundance of standing water, and substantial
mosquito populations. These endemic areas also
have large populations of infected dogs and wild
canids providing a reservoir of infection. Another
consideration for LOE reports may include improved
sensitivity of heartworm antigen tests over time
possibly resulting in detection of more animals with
low female worm burdens.
When considering the possibility of resistance, it
is generally accepted that genetic polymorphism
has always existed in populations of heartworms
and resistance-contributing alleles on a gene, or
multiple genes exist that could lead to a decrease
or loss of susceptibility to macrocyclic lactones.
What is not known is the frequency of these
resistance-contributing alleles, the number of genes
involved, and whether these alleles are dominant
or recessive in expressing the resistant phenotype.
The phenomenon of developing resistance in a
population is much more complex than merely the
presence of resistant alleles in individuals. Other
factors to consider are the distinct biology of the
parasite, the extent of refugia (untreated population
of hosts), the relative fitness of the wild-type
(susceptible) and resistant genotypes in the absence
and presence of macrocyclic lactones, the number of
animals treated, and the drug dosage used. Product
use under specific off-label conditions has been
shown to genetically select for worms with relative
resistance. These surviving worms over generations
can become a resistant subpopulation.
In vitro assays have identified microfilariae that are
less susceptible to high doses of all the macrocyclic
lactones. These microfilariae exhibit an allele
on the P-glycoprotein gene that differs from the
general population. Subsequent in vitro larval
migration inhibition assays (LMIA) utilizing L3
derived from these same isolates of microfilariae
have demonstrated no significant difference in
susceptibility of these propagated isolates as
compared with known susceptible isolates. This
suggests that either the LMIA is measuring a
phenotype that is not associated with resistance, the
isolates tested from these prophylaxis failures are
not resistant, or other unknown factors are involved.
Several published studies examined the
susceptibility of the MP3 isolate (also referred to
as the MP3 strain1) originally collected in northeast
Georgia to various heartworm preventives. One
study compared the efficacy of a single oral dose of
ivermectin and milbemycin at standard prophylactic
doses following an experimental infection with 50
MP3 L3 in groups of 14 purpose-bred laboratory
dogs. A single adult worm was recovered in both
the ivermectin- and milbemycin-treated groups
out of a possible 700 L3. A second study compared
the efficacy of a single oral dose of ivermectin
or milbemycin or a topical dose of moxidectin or
selamectin, again at standard prophylactic doses,
following an experimental infection with 100 L3
in groups of 8 dogs. In this second study, 7 of 8
dogs had 23 to 24 worms out of a possible 800 L3
recovered from the ivermectin, milbemycin, and
selamectin groups. No worms were recovered from
the moxidectin group. A third study utilizing the MP3
isolate tested three monthly doses of milbemycin
after experimental infection with 40 L3 in 10 dogs.
No worms were recovered in any of these 10 dogs.
Looking at these three studies collectively, it is
evident the MP3 isolate had decreased susceptibility
to single monthly doses of ivermectin, milbemycin,
and selamectin but was susceptible to three
consecutive monthly doses of milbemycin and a
single dose of topical moxidectin. Of greater interest
was the 20-fold increase in number of worms
recovered when the number of L3 injected was
doubled. This would lead one to hypothesize that
challenge rates could be involved in LOE and the
problems seen in the Mississippi River Valley (MRV)
are multifactorial. Genetically, the MP3 isolate does
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
1
The term strain is being used to describe populations of worms being maintained in laboratories. More
appropriately, these populations should be described as propagated isolates. These populations consist
of numerous male and female worms, each with unique genetic makeup, undergoing sexual reproduction
leading to production of offspring with their own unique genetic design. Strains more appropriately describe
the result of asexually derived populations, such as bacteria.
8
American Heartworm Society

not exhibit the same allele on the P-glycoprotein
gene that was noted in the field isolates from
the MRV, whose microfilariae had decreased
susceptibility to macrocyclic lactones, suggesting
multiple genes may be involved.
Several in vivo studies were reported in which
microfilariae collected from heartworm-infected
dogs—many of which were on preventive, had
received microfilaricidal doses of macrocyclic
lactones and therefore were preselected for
macrocyclic lactone resistance—were fed to
mosquitoes. The L3 were then collected and
subsequently injected into laboratory dogs,
which were then placed on various preventives.
These studies identified the presence of resistant
subpopulations of heartworms in these dogs. Every
compound currently marketed in every form of
administration (oral, topical, and parenteral) was
less than perfect in at least one study. It seems
that although this resistance affects all macrocyclic
lactones, differences in active ingredients, doses,
and product formulation among the available
preventives can result in varying rates of failures.
Another possible factor in LOE is the host–parasite
relationship. The exact mode of action of the
macrocyclic lactones at preventive doses is not fully
known. A study involving Brugia malayi, a filarial
nematode causing lymphatic filariasis in humans,
indicates that ivermectin disrupts the ability of the
parasite to secrete an immunomodulating protein
from the secretory vesicle, exposing microfilariae
to the host immune response. This finding suggests
that macrocyclic lactones might work in conjunction
with the host immune system to eliminate the
microfilariae of Brugia. A separate study, utilizing
Dirofilaria immitis microfilariae, demonstrated
attachment of leukocytes to microfilariae in whole
blood in the presence of ivermectin. No such
attachment of white blood cells to microfilariae in
untreated whole blood was noted. Additionally,
the investigators found no attachment of cells to
microfilariae, in the presence of ivermectin, when no
serum was present. In separate studies, these same
cellular attachment tendencies have been observed
with D immitis larvae. These data collectively lead
us to believe ivermectin, and likely the other ML
products, act by affecting the D immitis microfilariae
and larvae’s ability to inhibit immune recognition,
exposing them to immunologic clearance.
Research is ongoing to determine the reason for
LOE located predominantly in the MRV. Every new
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
study adds to our knowledge base and increases our
understanding but also produces new questions.
The complex biology of the parasite, the effect
of changing environmental conditions that affect
vector populations, the dynamics of host (wild and
domestic) populations, and even the dynamics of
human interactions with pets are also relevant. In
the face of the many variable factors, it is critical that
all members of the veterinary practice ensure that
clients understand the implications of heartworm
infection and the risk of heartworm infection in their
area, and that they are providing their pets with
appropriate year-round heartworm prevention. The
macrocyclic lactones continue to be the best and
only option for preventing heartworm infections
and efforts need to be intensified in increasing
the number of dogs receiving chemoprophylaxis.
Reminder systems need to be implemented to
assist pet owners in purchasing and administering
products in a timely manner.
It is now generally accepted that isolated instances
of resistant heartworms have been identified. The
extent, the degree of spread, and the reasons for
resistance are not understood and are controversial.
All agree that owner compliance is the biggest factor
in the “failure” of preventives. There is general
agreement that resistance to heavy experimental
infections is worrisome, and that the products now
available are highly effective and should continue to
be used as the manufacturers suggest.
PRIMARY DIAGNOSTIC SCREENING
Annual testing is an integral part of ensuring that
prophylaxis is achieved and maintained. Should an
infection be diagnosed, more timely treatment can
be provided to minimize pathology and the potential
selection of resistant subpopulations.
Test Timing for Optimal Results
Currently available heartworm antigen tests detect
protein secreted mainly by adult female Dirofilaria
immitis, and the most useful microfilaria tests
concentrate microfilariae (modified Knott or filtration
test) and allow for greater sensitivity. The earliest
that heartworm antigen and microfilariae can be
detected is about 5 and 6 months post infection,
respectively. Antigenemia usually precedes but
sometimes lags the appearance of microfilariae by a
few weeks. Antigen may never be detected or may
only be sporadically detected in dogs with very low
female worm burdens. In addition, antigenemia may
be suppressed until about 9 months post infection
in infected dogs receiving macrocyclic lactone
9

chemoprophylaxis. To determine when testing might
become useful, a pre-detection period should be
added to the approximate date on which infection
may have been possible. A reasonable interval is 7
months. Thus, there is no need or justification for
testing a dog for antigen and microfilariae prior to 7
months of age.
Microfilaria and Antigen Testing
Whether screening a population of asymptomatic
dogs or seeking verification of a suspected
heartworm infection, antigen testing is the
most sensitive diagnostic method. It is now
recommended, however, that microfilaria testing
be done in tandem with antigen testing. This is
especially important if there is a high degree of
suspicion or if the heartworm prevention history
is unknown (e.g., dogs adopted from shelters). It
has come to light that in some dogs infected with
heartworms, antigen–antibody complexes may lead
to false-negative antigen test results. These dogs
will be antigen negative and microfilariae positive; a
study conducted on shelter dogs in the southeastern
United States reported this occurred at a rate of
7.1%. It is important that these dogs are identified
and treated to decrease the potential for selection of
resistant subpopulations of heartworms. There will
be instances where an infected dog is both antigen
and microfilariae negative.
Antigen Tests
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and
immunochromatographic test systems are available
for detecting circulating heartworm antigen. Each
testing format has proven to be clinically useful.
The current generation of heartworm antigen tests
identifies most “occult” (adult worms present but no
circulating microfilariae) infections consisting of at
least one mature female worm and are nearly 100%
specific. Differences in sensitivity exist especially
in cases with low worm burdens and/or low
antigenemia. Currently there are no verified tests
capable of detecting infections consisting of only
adult male worms.
To obtain reliable and reproducible results, antigen
tests must be performed in strict compliance
with the manufacturer’s instructions. Accuracy
of all heartworm tests under field conditions is
influenced by adherence to the instructions and
storage and handling of the test kit and sample.
This has been simplified for several tests that use
devices that minimize the number of steps and
partially automate the procedure. False-negative
10
and false-positive results can occur. If a test result is
unexpected, the test should be repeated. If the result
is still ambiguous, independent confirmation by a
reference laboratory is recommended to confirm the
result. Concentration tests for microfilariae, thoracic
radiography to detect signs of heartworm disease,
or ultrasonographic visualization of worms may also
validate weakly positive antigen test results. In cases
of minimal exposure, it is recommended to confirm
all positive antigen tests in asymptomatic dogs prior
to any adulticide therapy.
The color intensity of a positive antigen test result
cannot reliably be used to determine the level of
worm burden. The amount of antigen in circulation
bears a direct, but imprecise, relationship to the
number of mature female heartworms. A graded
test reaction can be recognized by ELISA test
systems, but quantitative results are not displayed
by immunochromatographic tests. The utility of the
ELISA tests for assessing the degree of parasitism
is limited by confounding complications such as
the transient increase in antigenemia associated
with recent worm death or low antigen levels from
infections with young adult female worms and/or
only a few adult females. Therefore, quantitative
analysis of antigen results is highly speculative and
requires correlation with other relevant information.
For example, radiographic evidence of advanced
pulmonary arterial disease typical of chronic
heartworm disease coupled with a low or absent
antigenemia is consistent with the aftermath of
a previous infection that has been cleared, either
naturally or by treatment.
False-negative test results occur most commonly
when infections are light, female worms are still
immature, only male worms are present, and/or the
test kit instructions have not been followed. There
are also documented cases of antigen–antibody
complexes interfering with antigen testing, resulting
in false-negative tests. Laboratory studies have
shown that heating serum will break down these
complexes, release antigen, and result in more
accurate test results. The routine heating of blood
samples IS NOT RECOMMENDED at this time as
this is contrary to the label instructions for these
tests. It also could interfere with the results of
combination tests that include an antibody test for
detection of other infectious agents. Due to this
possible interference, and the other considerations
mentioned, heartworm test results should only be
recorded as positive or no antigen detected (NAD)
and should not be written as “negative.” Antigen
American Heartworm Society

test results should be interpreted carefully, taking
other relevant clinical information into consideration.
In general, however, it is better to trust rather than
reject positive antigen test results.
Microfilaria Tests
In areas where the prevalence of heartworm infection
is high, many (~20%) heartworm-infected dogs
may not be microfilaremic, and this figure is even
higher for dogs on a macrocyclic lactone prevention
program. Considering this, most microfilaremic
dogs can be detected by microscopically examining
a drop of fresh blood under a cover slip for
microfilariae or cell movement caused by the
motile microfilariae. A stationary rather than a
migratory pattern of movement is indicative of a
Dirofilaria species, nearly always D immitis in the
United States. Movement beneath the buffy coat in
a microhematocrit tube also may be visible. These
are insensitive testing methods when low numbers
(50–100/mL) of microfilariae are present; however,
such patients are at a lower risk for severe reaction
after the administration of a microfilaricide and
are less likely to pose a threat as a reservoir of
infection. For more accurate results a concentration
technique (modified Knott test or filtration test)
should be used to determine the absence or presence
of microfilariae. The modified Knott test remains
the preferred method for observing morphology
and measuring body dimensions to differentiate
D immitis from non-pathogenic filarial species, such
as Acanthocheilonema (formerly Dipetalonema)
reconditum.
The modified Knott test is performed by mixing
1.0 mL of EDTA blood with 9.0 mL of 2% formalin
in a centrifuge tube. The tube is inverted several
times to mix the blood with the formalin solution,
lysing the red blood cells. The tube is then placed
in a centrifuge, spun at 1100 to 1500 rpm for 5 to
8 minutes, and the liquid is poured off leaving the
sediment. A drop of methylene blue is added to the
sediment and then the stained sediment is placed
on a glass slide and a cover slip applied. The slide is
examined under low power (100X) for the presence
6 months
oe
Pr
$ iS
Ake,
Rc
é : Oe t ae,
Wyse
®, %,
: as c
° *,
oe sy oy
ag
i ©
Z
e
s
seSA* 48 e
hk :
x8
ne Age,
3.
Maes gh
mee
OO Oe “te
le OS.
‘
Figure 3. Acanthocheilonema reconditum (top) and
Dirofilaria immitis (below). Photograph courtesy of Byron
Blagburn, PhD.
of microfilariae. To observe the characteristics of the
microfilariae, the slide can be examined under high-
dry (400X). The microfilariae of Dirofilaria immitis
are 295 to 325 microns (µm) long and have tapered
heads. The microfilariae of Acanthocheilonema
reconditum are 250 to 288 µm long with blunt heads
and curved tails (Figure 3).
All dogs should be tested for microfilariae.
Microfilaremia validates serologic results, is
diagnostic should a dog have antigen–antibody
complexes (no antigen detected on antigen tests),
identifies the patient as a reservoir of infection, and
alerts the veterinarian to a high microfilariae burden,
which may precipitate a severe reaction following
administration of a microfilaricide.
Testing Considerations Following Noncompliance
and When Changing Products
In instances of noncompliance or changing the brand
or type of heartworm preventive, it is important to
determine the heartworm status of the dog. The
dog should be antigen and microfilaria tested prior
to starting or changing products. A positive test
indicates preexisting infection. The dog should
always be retested 6 months later (Figure 4). A
positive test at this time would most likely be due
to an infection acquired before starting or resuming
preventive therapy; however, in rare instances,
an existing infection might be missed (i.e., false-
negative test due mainly to young or low worm
burden infection). Antigen and microfilaria testing
should be performed on the one-year anniversary
date of the initial test and annually thereafter.
6 months
1 year
Noncompliance: Test >Test aTest aDTest
Day 0
Day 180
Day 360
annually thereafter
Figure 4. The testing protocol following known noncompliance includes three tests in the first year, with annual testing
thereafter.
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
11

Figure 5. Moderate heartworm disease. Radiographic images courtesy of C. Thomas Nelson, DVM.
Figure 6. Severe heartworm disease. Radiographic images courtesy of C. Thomas Nelson, DVM.
OTHER DIAGNOSTIC AIDS
Additional testing methods are useful for confirming
the diagnosis and staging the severity of heartworm
disease.
Radiography
Assessment of cardiopulmonary status may
be useful for evaluating a patient’s prognosis.
Radiography provides the most objective
method of assessing the severity of heartworm
cardiopulmonary disease secondary to heartworm
infection. Typical (nearly pathognomonic) signs
of heartworm vascular disease are enlarged,
tortuous, and often truncated peripheral intralobar
and interlobar branches of the pulmonary arteries,
particularly in the diaphragmatic (caudal) lobes
(Figure 5). These findings are accompanied by
variable degrees of pulmonary parenchymal disease.
The earliest and most subtle pulmonary arterial
changes are most commonly found in the dorsal
12
caudal wedge of the diaphragmatic lung lobes. As
the severity of infection and chronicity of disease
progress, the pulmonary arterial signs are seen in
successively larger branches (Figure 6). In the worst
cases, the right heart eventually enlarges.
Echocardiography
The body wall of adult heartworms is highly
echogenic and produces distinctive, short parallel-
sided images with the appearance of “equal signs”
where the imaging plane cuts across loops of the
parasite. Echocardiography can provide definitive
evidence of heartworm infection, as well as allow
for assessment of cardiac anatomic and functional
consequences of the disease (Figure 7). It is not an
efficient method of making this diagnosis, however,
particularly in lightly infected dogs, because
the worms often are limited to the peripheral
branches of the pulmonary arteries beyond the
echocardiographic field of view. When heartworms
American Heartworm Society

are numerous, they are more likely to be present in
the main pulmonary artery, right and proximal left
interlobar branches, or within the right side of the
heart where they can be imaged easily. In dogs with
hemoglobinuria, visualization of heartworms in the
orifice of the tricuspid valve provides conclusive
confirmation of caval syndrome.
PRE-ADULTICIDE EVALUATION
The extent of diagnostic testing necessary in the
pre-adulticide evaluation varies depending on the
clinical status of each patient. Selected clinical
and laboratory tests should only be performed to
complement information obtained from a thorough
history, physical examination, and antigen and
microfilaria tests. It is important to note that some
key factors influencing the probability of post-
adulticide thromboembolic complication and
outcome of treatment are not easily measured with
standard diagnostic procedures, including 1) the
activity level of the dog, 2) the extent of concurrent
pulmonary vascular disease, and 3) the severity of
infection (high versus low worm burdens).
High activity levels of the dog are one of the most
significant factors contributing to post-adulticidal
complications. Prior to treatment, the owner’s
ability and willingness to properly confine treated
dogs should be thoroughly investigated. Restricting
activity is imperative as exercise, excitement, and
overheating are harbingers of complications.
Thoracic radiographs can assist in providing an
assessment of the animal’s cardiopulmonary status
and can be helpful in evaluating the potential
for post-adulticide treatment complications.
Thromboembolic disease is commonly seen in
infected dogs exhibiting radiographic signs of severe
pulmonary arterial obstruction, especially in those
animals presenting with clinical signs. Regardless
of radiographic findings, heartworms must be
eliminated, although not necessarily immediately, in
all patients that can tolerate the death of worms.
The greater the number of heartworms killed
during an adulticide treatment, the more significant
the potential for obstructive and inflammatory
pathology. Unfortunately, no test (or combination
of tests) is available to accurately determine the
number of heartworms present. Whether carrying
low or high worm burdens, infected dogs can
be clinically asymptomatic and have minimal
radiographic changes. So, even with extensive
diagnostics, predicting post-adulticide complications
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
06/02/2004 02:43:33 AM
ters they
Freq.: 1.7 MHz/3.4 MHz
Depth: 10.0 cm
Figure 7. Echocardiogram image courtesy of Matthew Miller,
DVM.
is difficult. One must always assume post-treatment
complications are likely, and every infected pet must
be managed as though a substantial heartworm
mass is present or a potently violent individual
immune reaction to the dead and dying worms could
occur.
Historically, due to financial limitations of some
pet owners and animal shelters, large numbers
of adulticide treatments have been successfully
performed without the benefit of extensive
diagnostics. While diagnostics can be an important
part of defining an individual’s heartworm disease
status, each plan must be developed considering
both the animal and individual pet owner. No set
protocol has been established for pre-treatment
workup and reasonable judgment should always be
used to weigh the necessity, benefit, and extent of
each diagnostic procedure performed.
Adult heartworms are a grave risk to our canine
patients. The longer they remain in an animal, the
greater the damage to the cardiopulmonary system
and the greater the risk of illness and death. It is
probable that treating in the absence of diagnostics,
while not ideal, is better than refusing to perform a
needed treatment.
PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT
Treating heartworm infections in asymptomatic
patients or those exhibiting signs of mild disease
usually is not problematic if exercise is curtailed.
Infections associated with moderate or severe
heartworm disease (Table 1) or in patients with
concurrent disease often are challenging.
13

Table 1. Summary of Clinical Signs of Canine Heartworm Disease
Mild
Asymptomatic or cough
Moderate
Severe
Caval Syndrome
Cough, exercise intolerance, abnormal lung sounds
Cough, exercise intolerance, dyspnea, abnormal heart and lung sounds, enlarged
liver (hepatomegaly), syncope (temporary loss of consciousness from reduced
blood flow to the brain), ascites (fluid accumulation in the abdominal cavity), death
Sudden onset of severe lethargy and weakness accompanied by hemoglobinemia
and hemoglobinuria
The goals of any heartworm treatment are to
improve the clinical condition of the animal and
to eliminate all life stages of the heartworms
(microfilariae, larval stages, juveniles, and adults)
with minimal post-treatment complications. Dogs
exhibiting significant clinical signs of heartworm
disease should be stabilized before administering
an adulticide. This may require administration of
glucocorticosteroids, diuretics, vasodilators, positive
inotropic agents, and fluid therapy.
A thorough understanding of the host–parasite
relationship is necessary to effectively manage all
cases. As expected, the number of worms has an
effect on the severity of disease; but of equal, if not
greater, importance is the activity level of the dog.
Controlled studies have shown that dogs infected
by surgical transplantation with 50 heartworms and
exercise-restricted took longer to develop clinical
disease and developed less pulmonary vascular
disease than dogs with 14 heartworms and allowed
moderate activity. This was also evident in a study
in naturally infected dogs where there was no
correlation between the number of heartworms and
pulmonary vascular resistance and is an indication
that the host–parasite interaction plays a significant
role in the severity of disease. A subsequent study
reported similar findings in dogs being treated with
melarsomine.
Whereas live heartworms can cause endarteritis and
muscular hypertrophy of arteriolar walls, primarily
of the caudal pulmonary arteries, dying and dead
heartworms cause a significant portion of pathology
seen in clinical disease. As worms die from either
natural causes or as a result of administration of
adulticidal therapy, they decompose; and worm
fragments lodge in the distal pulmonary arterioles
and capillary beds in the caudal lung lobes, blocking
blood flow. These worm fragments along with the
14
elicited inflammation and platelet aggregation result
in thromboembolisms. During periods of increased
activity or exercise, the increased blood flow to these
blocked vessels can cause capillary delamination,
rupture, and subsequent fibrosis. This leads to
increased pulmonary vascular resistance and
potentially, right-sided heart failure and illustrates
a direct correlation between the activity level of the
dog and the severity of disease.
ADULTICIDE THERAPY
Melarsomine Dihydrochloride
Melarsomine, administered via deep intramuscular
injection into the belly of the epaxial lumbar muscles
(between L3 and L5), is the only adulticidal drug
approved by the FDA. Mild swelling and some
soreness at the injection site may be present for a
few days, but this can be minimized by ensuring that
the injection is deposited into the belly of the epaxial
musculature with a needle newly changed after the
drug is drawn into the syringe and of appropriate
length and gauge for the size of dog and body
condition. Strictly adhering to the manufacturer’s
instructions for administration is imperative.
Exercise restriction during the recovery period
is ESSENTIAL for minimizing cardiopulmonary
complications (see Pulmonary Thromboembolism).
Melarsomine had not been shown to have
activity against worms less than 4 months old;
recent unpublished data, however, suggest that
melarsomine may have more efficacy against
juvenile worms than previously believed. The
two-injection protocol with melarsomine (i.e., two
injections of 2.5 mg/kg body weight 24 hours apart)
listed on the product insert for treating class 1 and
2 heartworm disease kills only about 90% of the
adult worms. The three-dose alternate protocol (one
injection of 2.5 mg/kg body weight followed at least
one month later by two injections of the same dose
American Heartworm Society

24 hours apart) listed for treating class 3 heartworm
disease kills 98% of the worms. These overall
efficacy values reflect the percentage of worms
killed in groups of dogs and not the percentage of
dogs cleared of worms, which are considerably
lower than these overall efficacy values. The
three-dose protocol has the added advantage of
decreased complication rates and increased safety
as a number of the adult worms are killed with the
first melarsomine injection and most, if not all, of
the remaining worms are killed with the second and
third injections.
Staging of the disease and use of the two-dose
protocol has failed to adequately ensure treatment
success. Therefore, regardless of the severity of
the disease (with the exception of caval syndrome),
the three-dose protocol is recommended by the
American Heartworm Society due to the increased
safety and efficacy.
Pulmonary Thromboembolism
Pulmonary thromboembolism is an inevitable
consequence of successful adulticide therapy and
may be severe if infection is heavy and pulmonary
arterial disease is extensive. If signs of embolism
(low grade fever, cough, hemoptysis, exacerbation of
right heart failure) develop, they are usually evident
within 7 to 10 days, but occasionally as late as 4
weeks after completion of adulticide administration.
Mild embolism in relatively healthy areas of lung
may be clinically unapparent. A pivotal factor in
reducing the risk of thromboembolic complications
is STRICT exercise restriction.
ADJUNCT THERAPY
Steroids
Administration of diminishing anti-inflammatory
doses of glucocorticosteroids helps control clinical
signs of pulmonary thromboembolism. Whereas
studies showed a decrease in efficacy of the
arsenical thiacetarsamide when glucocorticosteroids
were administered concurrently, a study showed no
decrease in the efficacy of melarsomine when used
in conjunction with prednisone. In highly endemic
areas where animals are more likely to have
significant worm burdens, glucocorticosteroids such
as prednisone may be used. Prednisone is routinely
dosed at 0.5 mg/kg twice a day (BID) for the first
week and 0.5 mg/kg once daily (SID) for the second
week, followed by 0.5 mg/kg every other day (EOD)
for 1 to 2 weeks.
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
NSAIDs/Aspirin
The empirical use of aspirin for its antithrombotic
effect or to reduce pulmonary arteritis is not
recommended for heartworm-infected dogs.
Convincing evidence of clinical benefit is lacking and
there is some research suggesting that aspirin may
be contraindicated.
Doxycycline
Many filarial nematodes, including Dirofilaria
immitis, harbor obligate, intracellular, gram-negative,
endo-symbiotic bacteria belonging to the genus
Wolbachia (Rickettsiales). Doxycycline reduces
Wolbachia numbers in all stages of heartworms.
Doxycycline administration during the first or second
month following experimental heartworm infection
was lethal to third- and fourth-stage heartworm
larvae. In addition, in dogs with adult infections,
doxycycline gradually suppressed microfilaremia.
Microfilariae ingested by mosquitoes on dogs
treated with doxycycline developed into third-stage
larvae that appeared to be normal in appearance and
motility, but these larvae were not able to develop
into adult worms, thus reducing the risk of selecting
for resistant subpopulations.
Wolbachia have also been implicated as a
component in the pathogenesis of filarial diseases,
possibly through their metabolites. Recent studies
have shown that a major surface protein of
Wolbachia (WSP) induces a specific IgG response
in hosts infected by D immitis. It is hypothesized
that Wolbachia may contribute to pulmonary and
renal inflammation through its surface protein WSP.
Studies have shown that experimentally infected
heartworm-positive dogs pretreated with ivermectin
and doxycycline prior to receiving melarsomine
injections had less pulmonary pathology associated
with the death of the heartworms (Figure 8).
When incorporated into a heartworm treatment
protocol, doxycycline should be given before
administration of melarsomine so the Wolbachia
organisms and their metabolites are reduced
or absent when the worms die and fragment.
Doxycycline is administered at 10 mg/kg BID for 4
weeks. Doxycycline has been shown to eliminate
over 95% of the Wolbachia organisms in the
filarial nematode Wuchereria bancrofti, resulting
in amicrofilaremia for 12 months. These data
suggest the absence of Wolbachia, or at least
very low numbers, as the organism is necessary
for embryogenesis. In D immitis (adults and
15

Melarsomine only
Ivermectin / Doxycycline / Melarsomine
Melarsomine only
Ivermectin / Doxycycline / Melarsomine
Figure 8. Pulmonary pathology associated with the death of heartworms in experimentally infected heartworm-positive dogs
pretreated with ivermectin and doxycycline prior to receiving melarsomine injections. Photographs courtesy of John McCall,
PhD and Laura Kramer, DVM, PhD.
microfilariae) data suggest Wolbachia numbers
remain low for at least 12 months following
doxycycline administration.
Minocycline has been shown to be highly effective
in eliminating Wolbachia organisms from the filarial
nematode Onchocerca gutturosa. No published
studies have been conducted in D immitis but
available pharmacological data and anecdotal
reports suggest this is a viable alternative if
doxycycline is not available. The dosing regimen is
the same as doxycycline.
Macrocyclic Lactones
It is highly probable that a heartworm-positive dog
harbors heartworms that can range from less than 1
month to as much as 7 years of age. The incomplete
efficacy of melarsomine against young adult worms
could present a problem in achieving the goal of
eliminating all of the worms. The susceptibility gap
between the macrocyclic lactones and melarsomine
is demonstrated in Figure 9.
16
The susceptibility gap can be minimized by
administering a macrocyclic lactone preventive
for 2 months prior to administering melarsomine.
This will reduce new infections, eliminate existing
susceptible larvae, and allow older worms (2 and
4 months of age) to mature to a point where
they would be more susceptible to melarsomine.
Reduction of the susceptibility gap can also be
potentiated with concurrent use of doxycycline for 30
days, as this will essentially eliminate all developing
larvae during the first 60 days of infection.
Macrocyclic lactones administered as microfilaricides
may cause a rapid decrease in the numbers of
microfilariae and should be used with caution in
dogs with high microfilarial counts. Pretreatment
with antihistamines and glucocorticosteroids will
minimize potential reactions. Topical moxidectin is
now FDA-approved for use in heartworm-positive
dogs to eliminate microfilariae. No adverse reactions
due to high microfilarial counts were observed in the
laboratory or field studies conducted for approval of
this label claim.
American Heartworm Society
ft RR
;
mal
reraw
=
1
'

Macrocyclic lactone susceptible
(per product labels)
Susceptibility Gap
$$$ >sscncccncncncnenenunenenens
Melarsomine susceptible
(per product label)
>
Adult females
Juveniles
eee
3= L4
—~
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Days post-infection
Figure 9. Timeline of D immitis development, showing periods of susceptibility to macrocyclic lactones and melarsomine.
The dotted line represents the “treatment gap,” when D immitis is not considered to be susceptible to either treatment. From
Merial Limited, Duluth, GA. ©2008. All rights reserved.
Macrocyclic Lactones/Doxycycline
Select macrocyclic lactones coupled with
doxycycline individually suppress embryogenesis
and weaken adult heartworms. As mentioned
previously doxycycline reduces Wolbachia levels in
all stages of heartworms. Studies have shown that
administration of doxycycline in combination with
ivermectin provided more rapid adulticidal activity
than ivermectin alone as well as more efficiently
reducing Wolbachia numbers more effectively
than doxycycline alone. Anecdotal reports on other
macrocyclic lactones with adulticidal properties
suggest similar results but no confirmatory studies
have been published.
In cases where arsenical therapy is not possible or
is contraindicated, the use of a monthly heartworm
preventive along with doxycycline at 10 mg/kg BID
for a 4-week period might be considered. An antigen
test should be performed every 6 months and the
dog not considered cleared until two consecutive
NAD (no antigen detected) heartworm antigen
tests, 6 months apart, have been obtained. If the
dog is still antigen positive after one year, repeat
the doxycycline therapy. Exercise should be rigidly
restricted for the duration of the treatment process.
AHS-RECOMMENDED TREATMENT PROTOCOL
The AHS recommends a multimodal approach
to treating heartworms based on the information
presented above and depicted in the following
example management protocol (Table 2). A
retrospective study of clinical cases comparing the
protocol listed in Table 2 with a similar protocol
without doxycycline showed a decrease in
respiratory complications and mortality rates when
doxycycline was included.
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
SURGICAL EXTRACTION OF ADULT HEARTWORMS
Caval Syndrome (Dirofilarial Hemoglobinuria)
Caval syndrome develops acutely in some heavily
infected dogs when adult heartworms partially
obstruct blood flow through the tricuspid valve and
also interfere with valve closure. Severe passive
congestion of the liver, a coarse systolic murmur
of tricuspid regurgitation, and jugular pulsations
are characteristic features of the syndrome. The
diagnosis is based on a sudden onset of severe
lethargy, dyspnea, pale mucous membranes, and
weakness accompanied by hemoglobinemia and
hemoglobinuria. Caval syndrome can be confirmed
conclusively by echocardiographic visualization of
heartworms within the tricuspid orifice and posterior
vena cava (Figure 10). The clinical course usually
ends fatally within 2 days if surgical extraction of the
worms is not pursued promptly.
Surgical removal of worms from the right atrium and
orifice of the tricuspid valve can be accomplished
using light sedation (may not be necessary), local
anesthesia, and either a rigid or flexible alligator
forceps or an intravascular retrieval snare introduced
preferentially via the right external jugular vein. With
fluoroscopic guidance if available, the instrument
should continue to be passed until worms can
no longer be retrieved (Figure 11). Immediately
following a successful operation, the murmur
should soften or disappear and within 12 to 24 hours
hemoglobinuria should disappear. Fluid therapy
may be necessary in critically ill, hypovolemic dogs
to restore hemodynamic and renal function. Within
a few weeks following recovery from surgery,
adulticide chemotherapy is recommended to
eliminate any remaining worms, particularly if many
are still visible echocardiographically.
17
80//
120
150 180 210
(antigen-positive)
»

Table 2. AHS-Recommended Management Protocol
Day
Day 0
Treatment
Dog diagnosed and verified as heartworm positive:
• Positive antigen (Ag) test verified with microfilaria (MF) test
• If no microfilariae are detected, confirm with 2nd
Ag test from a different manufacturer
Begin exercise restriction.
• The more pronounced the signs, the stricter the exercise restriction
If the dog is symptomatic:
• Stabilize with appropriate therapy and nursing care
• Prednisone prescribed at 0.5 mg/kg BID 1st week, 0.5 mg/kg SID 2nd week, 0.5 mg/kg
EOD 3rd and 4th weeks
Day 1
Administer heartworm preventive.
• If microfilariae are detected, pretreat with antihistamine and glucocorticosteroid,
if not already on prednisone, to reduce risk of anaphylaxis
• Observe for at least 8 hours for signs of reaction
Days 1–28
Day 30
Day 60
Day 90
Day 91
Day 120
Day 271
Administer doxycycline 10 mg/kg BID for 4 weeks.
• Reduces pathology associated with dead heartworms
• Disrupts heartworm transmission
Administer heartworm preventive.
Administer heartworm preventive.
First melarsomine injection 2.5 mg/kg intramuscularly (IM)
Prescribe prednisone 0.5 mg/kg BID 1st week, 0.5 mg/kg SID 2nd week, 0.5 mg/kg EOD
3rd and 4th weeks.
Decrease activity level even further.
• Cage restriction/on leash when using yard
Administer heartworm preventive.
Second melarsomine injection 2.5 mg/kg IM
Third melarsomine injection 2.5 mg/kg IM
Prescribe prednisone 0.5 mg/kg BID 1st week, 0.5 mg/kg SID 2nd week, 0.5 mg/kg EOD
3rd and 4th weeks.
Continue exercise restriction for 6 to 8 weeks following last melarsomine injections.
Test for presence of microfilariae.
• If positive treat with a microfilaricide and retest in 4 weeks
Establish year-round heartworm prevention.
Antigen test 6 months after completion; screen for microfilariae.
18
American Heartworm Society

Pulmonary Arterial Infections
The main pulmonary artery and lobar branches can
be accessed with flexible alligator forceps aided
by fluoroscopic guidance. Intraoperative mortality
with this technique is very low. Overall survival and
rate of recovery of dogs at high risk of pulmonary
thromboembolism is improved significantly by
physically removing as many worms as possible
before beginning adulticide therapy. When the
facilities are available, worm extraction is the
procedure of choice for the most heavily infected
and high-risk dogs. Before electing this method of
treatment, however, echocardiographic visualization
of the right heart and pulmonary arteries should be
performed to determine that a sufficient number of
worms are in accessible locations.
ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES
Long-term Macrocyclic Lactone Administration
Slow-kill methods using continuous monthly
administration of prophylactic doses of any
macrocyclic lactone are NOT RECOMMENDED.
While effective in reducing the life span of juvenile
and adult heartworms, it appears that the older
worms are less susceptible, taking longer to die.
The adulticidal effect of macrocyclic lactones
has been shown to take more than 2 years of
continuous administration before adult heartworms
are 95% eliminated, and the timing for rigid
exercise restriction is unknown with this approach.
Throughout this period, the infection would persist
and pathology would continue to progress. Another
important concern in using macrocyclic lactones
in monotherapy of heartworm-positive dogs as
stand-alone therapy is the potential for selection of
resistant subpopulations of heartworms.
Herbal Therapies
No “natural” or herbal therapies have been shown
to be safe and effective prevention or treatment for
heartworm disease.
CONFIRMATION OF ADULTICIDE EFFICACY
Clinical improvement is possible without completely
eliminating the adult heartworms. Worms that
do survive adulticide treatment are invariably the
antigen-producing females. Most microfilaremic
dogs with post-adulticide, female unisex infections
become occult within 6 to 9 months, with or
without microfilaricide treatment, and particularly
if they were treated with doxycycline and are
on a macrocyclic lactone preventive during and
after adulticidal therapy. Consequently, clinical
2014 Canine Heartworm Guidelines
ISMALLK9A CA123
Figure 10. Echocardiogram images courtesy of Stephen
Jones, DVM (above) and Matthew Miller, DVM (below).
improvement and successful clearance of
microfilariae from the blood do not verify a complete
adulticide effect. Recurrence of microfilaremia 6
months later may be due to incomplete clearance
of adult worms, maturation of immature worms
if a preventive was not given during adulticide
therapy, or a new infection due to a lapse in
chemoprophylaxis.
Heartworm antigen testing is the most reliable
method of confirming the efficacy of adulticidal
therapy. If all of the adult female worms have
been killed, heartworm antigen should become
undetectable by 6 months post treatment. However,
this single test result does not verify that the dog is
negative for heartworms, as larval and/or juvenile
heartworms may be present in the dog and an
insufficient amount of antigen is being produced by
these young worms to elicit a positive test result.
This is especially critical if a macrocyclic lactone was
not administered prior to or initiated concurrently
with adulticidal therapy. If a heartworm-positive
dog is immediately treated with adulticide and a
macrocyclic lactone is not given until 3 to 4 weeks
after the last dose of adulticide, the dog should have
19

a negative antigen test 7 months after the initial dose of macrocyclic
lactone before being considered cleared of adult worms. Since adult
worms may continue to die for more than a month following adulticide
administration, dogs that are still antigenemic at any time less than 6
months post treatment should be allowed more time to clear antigen
before retreatment is considered.
ELIMINATION OF MICROFILARIAE
Macrocyclic lactones administered as microfilaricides may cause a
rapid decrease in the numbers of microfilariae and should be used
with caution in dogs with high microfilarial counts. Pretreatment with
antihistamines and glucocorticosteroids is advisable in the face of high
microfilaria burdens to minimize potential reactions. Topical moxidectin
is approved by the FDA to eliminate microfilariae. No adverse reactions
due to high microfilaria counts were observed in the laboratory or field
studies conducted for approval of this label claim.
Historically, microfilaricidal treatment was usually done about 3 weeks
to a month after adulticidal therapy, with the understanding that
several weekly treatments were often required to completely eliminate
circulating microfilariae. Current protocols utilizing doxycycline in
combination with regular preventive doses of macrocyclic lactones
have essentially eliminated the need for post-adulticidal elimination of
microfilariae. Administration of a macrocyclic lactone should always
begin as soon as the dog is diagnosed with a heartworm infection.
Including doxycycline in the treatment protocol as previously described
hastens the elimination of microfilariae.
When elimination of microfilariae is accomplished in the course of
heartworm chemoprophylaxis, a microfilaria test should be performed
in adulticide-treated dogs at the time the antigen test is conducted
6 months post treatment. Controlling the spread of heartworms
entails decreasing the microfilaremic reservoirs of infection in the
dog population and the benefits of doing so have been cited (see
HEARTWORM CHEMOPROPHYLAXIS).
ELECTIVE SURGERIES ON DOGS WITH HEARTWORMS
Veterinarians are frequently faced with the decision whether to perform
an elective procedure, such as a spay or neuter, on a heartworm-positive
dog. A study has shown no increase in perioperative complications in
heartworm-positive dogs with no to mild clinical signs of heartworm
disease. Elective surgical procedures should be avoided in dogs
exhibiting signs of more advanced disease, and treatment utilizing the
protocol in Table 2 should be initiated. Surgery can then be performed 6
months after adulticidal treatment if the dog has recovered sufficiently.
Figure 11. Surgical removal of
worms. Photographs courtesy of
C. Thomas Nelson, DVM.
AMERICAN
HEARTWORM
SOCIETY
EST.1974
20
These guidelines are based on the latest information on heartworm disease. In keeping
with the objective of the Society to encourage adoption of standardized procedures for
the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of heartworm disease, they will continue to be
updated as new knowledge becomes available.
American Heartworm Society
