What Is Autoimmune Disease in Dogs?
An autoimmune disease occurs when the immune system, responsible for protecting against foreign invaders, mistakenly targets its own body’s proteins and cells instead of external threats.

This immune response creates immune complexes that can harm tissues and organs, leading to various symptoms. 

While not typically an immediate emergency, untreated autoimmune diseases can have serious consequences that can be fatal. 

Types of Autoimmune Disease in Dogs
Autoimmune diseases can manifest in various ways, affecting different parts of a dog’s body. Some common types include:

Pemphigus foliaceus: Targets skin cells, causing cracks, fissures, pustules, scaling, and infection

Pemphigus erythematosus: Affects skin on the face, particularly in certain breeds like German Shepherds, Collies, and Shetland Sheepdogs

Pemphigus vulgaris: Rare and severe; can lead to skin lesions, including erosions and vesicles, affecting various parts of the body, including the lips, nose, nailbeds, and other skin areas

Bullous pemphigoid: Separates the top and middle layers of the skin

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE): Affects multiple systems, creating symptoms including lameness, skin lesions, anemia, kidney failure, and seizures

Discoid Lupus Erythematosus (DLE): A benign form of lupus that affects the skin of only the nose and face

Myasthenia gravis: Impairs neuromuscular junctions, leading to muscle weakness that can manifest as difficulty eating or swallowing, regurgitation, and generalized limb weakness that often is worsened with exercise

Granulomatous Meningoencephalitis (GME): Inflammation that typically affects the blood vessels of the brain and spinal cord, causing seizures, blindness, circling, and abnormal gait

Masticatory myositis: Targets muscles used for chewing; typically affects large-breed dogs and leads to painful and swollen muscles, a reluctance to eat, difficulty swallowing, and eventual weight loss

Glomerulonephritis: Impacts kidney function, and includes symptoms associated with kidney failure, such as an increased thirst and urination, muscle wasting, lack of appetite, and swelling of the limbs and abdomen

Polyarthritis: Causes joint inflammation, triggering lameness and arthritis

Uveodermatologic syndrome (Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-like Syndrome): Targets melanin pigment and frequently results in blindness, affecting breeds such as the Akita, Old English Sheepdog, Golden Retriever, Husky, and Irish Setter

Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS): Commonly referred to as “dry eye”; occurs in about 1% of the canine population, and more so in Shih Tzus, Cocker Spaniels, Boston Terriers, and Pekingese

Pannus (chronic immune-mediated superficial keratitis): A progressive, non-curable disease that damages the cornea and leads to blindness

Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (ITP): Affects platelets, the cells responsible for blood clotting, leading to extensive bruising and potentially hemorrhage

Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA): Impairs the red blood cells, which carry oxygen to the tissues, resulting in weakness, pale gums, difficulty breathing, and/or collapse

While IMHA, ITP, and pemphigus foliaceus occur in dogs more commonly than other autoimmune diseases, overall, autoimmune disease is uncommon in dogs.

Symptoms of Autoimmune Disease in Dogs
Dogs suffering from an autoimmune disease will experience symptoms associated with the organs or cell functions targeted by the immune system.

Some symptoms can occur sporadically, worsening over time, and some can occur suddenly.

Though not an exhaustive list, depending on the area under attack by the immune system, dogs commonly will show symptoms including:

Anemia (low red blood cell count)

Blood in the urine or stool

Bruising and pinpoint hemorrhages seen on the gums or skin (petechiae)

Collapse

Decreased appetite

Depigmentation of the skin and nose

Difficulty breathing or an increased respiratory rate

Difficulty eating

Enlarged lymph nodes

Erythema (redness) of the skin

Fever

Hair loss

Increased heart rate

Kidney failure

Lameness

Lethargy

Mouth ulcers and bad breath

Muscle atrophy

Pale gums

Painful or stiff muscles and joints

Scaling, redness, crusting, and skin ulcerations

Seizures

Sneezing, often with blood (epistaxis)

Swelling of the limbs or abdomen

Vomiting

Causes of Autoimmune Disease in Dogs
Autoimmune diseases can affect any breed, but they are more frequently observed in unspayed females.

Contributing factors include genetics (with a higher occurrence in purebreds), cancer, or environmental influences like UV light, infections, medications, or other medical therapies.

Dogs diagnosed with one autoimmune disease are more likely to develop other immune-mediated diseases.

 

How Veterinarians Diagnose Autoimmune Disease in Dogs
Diagnosing autoimmune diseases can be challenging.

Such a diagnosis is often made through a process of exclusion, which means that other possible causes are ruled out and the true underlying cause remains unknown.

Veterinarians typically use blood work, urine tests, and other screenings to identify potential issues. In some cases, a biopsy or advanced imaging such as a CT scan or MRI may be necessary.

While not all tests are 100% confirmatory, when analyzed together with the symptoms, there can be sufficient information to make an immune-mediated diagnosis. 

Treatment of Autoimmune Disease in Dogs
Because autoimmune diseases occur due to an over-reactive and inappropriate immune system, treatment aims at suppressing the immune system.

This is often approached using prescription medications called immunosuppressants.

Steroids at high doses are the most prescribed drug and the most effective, though they have adverse side effects.

To minimize or avoid these side effects, other immunosuppressive drugs may be used in conjunction with steroids.

Because certain drug combinations appear to work better for specific conditions and have a variable response in the individual, be sure to partner with your veterinarian for the best therapy options for your dog. 

Because many dogs suffering from the negative effects of autoimmune disease experience pain or discomfort and poor quality of life, pain medications will often be prescribed.

Many dogs with autoimmune disease also have secondary infections, and antibiotics may be needed. 

Additionally, topical therapies such as ointments, shampoos, or conditioners are often prescribed in conjunction with oral medications as an effective way to target localized lesions and decrease the dose of oral medications.

Affected dogs typically don’t require a change of diet or supplements, but some dogs with long-lasting kidney issues or glomerulonephritis can benefit from prescription diets such as Royal Canin Renal.