Emily Johnson
carlosrojas20/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
If you’ve ever had an injury or surgery, you may have welcomed the time off to rest and recover. But after a few days, you probably became restless and bored.
Releasing pent-up energy can be tricky when you’re laid up while trying to heal.
Unsurprisingly, your dog feels the same way when recovering from surgery.
While we can’t offer them books or movies to pass the time, there are ways to keep your pup busy and happy while they’re recovering from surgery—without risking further injury.
When you think about tiring out your dog, you may assume physical activity is the only way to get the job done. But your pup can benefit from more than a game of fetch or a long walk.
Dogs are smart and they enjoy using their brains. Mental stimulation—including activities such as puzzle toys, obedience training, and even a change of scenery—can help drain your dog’s energy reserves.
If dogs don’t get enough mental stimulation, they may turn to other “fun” activities such as chewing up the couch, getting into the trash, or digging holes in the yard to keep themselves occupied. The aftermath of such activities isn’t fun for pet parents.
Mental stimulation is especially important for dogs who are recovering from surgery.
With the physical limitations required during recovery, brain games can help keep your pup content while they are stuck on bed rest.
If your dog is restricted from their normal activities, such as long walks or running around the yard, mental activities can help keep them occupied and happy.
Let’s look at a few ways to keep your dog busy—but safe—after surgery.
Puzzle toys are enrichment toys that encourage your dog to think and use their nose. Puzzle toys have small compartments where you can hide kibble or treats.
Your dog then finds the treats by figuring out challenges, such as flipping open a lid, sliding a cover, or pulling open a drawer.
This is a great opportunity to create new games for your dog that don’t require strenuous activity such as tugging or running.
For example, you could teach your dog to clean up their toys or guess which hand holds a treat.
Low-intensity games are a great way to have your dog use their brain and bond with you without getting rowdy.
Your pup’s convalescence is a good time to button up their obedience training or teach them a new trick.
Training provides a mental challenge and can be done in multiple short sessions throughout the day.
Just ensure that any new tricks won’t disturb their recovery process.
For example, if your dog had surgery on their back, it’s best to avoid teaching them to roll over until they are fully healed.
Being cooped up indoors can make anyone go stir-crazy, including your dog.
If their recovery instructions allow, take your dog outside and let them hang out in the sunshine for a change of pace.
Even 20 minutes in a new location can refresh your pup’s brain and take away boredom-related stress.
If your pup isn’t able to walk, you might consider investing in a pet stroller so they can enjoy the fresh air without the risk of hurting themself.
New sights, smells, and sounds are enough to keep your pup entertained, and they’ll be nice and tired by the time you get home.
A yummy snack is a sure way to make anyone happy. Natural options such as jerky meats (such as chicken or beef) and rawhide-free chews are safe and tasty for your pup to munch on during downtime.
Many chews, such as yak chews, are long-lasting, while others provide a quick, tasty treat.
Always ensure your dog is supervised for snack time and take care not to overfeed them.
It can be tempting to give your dog lots of extra treats while they're healing, but this could lead to an upset stomach or weight gain, which can lead to surgical complications.
Treats should only make up 10% or less of your dog’s daily calorie intake.
Like puzzle toys, treat-dispensing toys are a way to encourage your dog to “work for their food.”
You can put kibble or small treats in a dispenser ball that lets a few pieces out at a time as your dog noses or paws the toy around.
This not only stretches out mealtime, which is great for fast eaters, but also stimulates your dog’s brain.
Who doesn’t love a good massage, especially when your body isn’t feeling 100%? Dogs will also appreciate this luxury!
Giving your pup a little extra TLC canalso reduce muscle tension, improve circulation, alleviate pain, and enhance flexibility—all of which can benefit pets during recovery.
Dogs have a significantly stronger sense of smell than people. Allowing dogs to sniff out scents is a great way to activate their brains and expel some energy.
If your dog has somewhat normal mobility, try hiding strong-smelling treats around the house and having them search for them.
If your pup can’t move around much, you can hide treats or kibble in a snuffle mat for them to sniff through.
If your dog can leave the house, simply put them on a leash and let them sniff around the yard for a short time for a change of pace.
Although your dog loves you, seeing other friends and family can cheer them up while they are recovering.
However, it’s important to keep your dog calm and avoid riling them up, especially if they have activity restrictions.
If your pup tends to get overly excited around new people, keep them on a leash to prevent them from jumping or running around.
It’s important to remember that while you want to keep your dog from getting bored, they’re still recovering.
Here are some things you should not do post-surgery:
Deviate from your vet’s instructions: Always follow your vet’s post-op plan. This will be your pet’s best bet for a full recovery.
Allow your dog to get overly excited: Avoid getting your dog overly excited or allowing them to jump or run around. These activities can aggravate an injury or delay their recovery.
Allow your dog free-range space: Your dog will likely have activity restrictions while they are healing. Putting them on a short leash, in a crate, or in an enclosed space (such as in your office while you work) will help you keep an eye on them and prevent them from overdoing it.
Continue with high-intensity activities: Long walks, playing fetch or tug-of-war, running around the yard, or rough-housing with other pets can be detrimental to your dog’s healing process and could potentially tear their stitches or worsen their original injury. Stick to only low-impact, calm activities until you get the green light from your vet.
When in doubt, always reach out to your vet or Chewy’s Connect with a Vet with any questions about your dog’s activity during their recovery period.
They may also be able to provide additional ways to keep your dog happy and healthy until they fully heal.
WRITTEN BY
Emily Johnson
Freelance Writer
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.