beavera/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
It can be anxiety-inducing to hear that your pet will be undergoing anesthesia. However, anesthesia is a good thing! The word “anesthesia” means “without sensation.” It is what prevents your dog from feeling pain during a procedure.
Anesthetics can block nerve signals, reducing the sensation of pain, and they can cause unconsciousness, preventing the awareness of pain.
Anesthesia for dogs is extremely common. Any dog who gets spayed or neutered has anesthesia.
Other examples of common procedures that might require anesthesia include removing a mass, taking a biopsy, a dental cleaning, or wound repair.
While anesthesia causes a complete loss of awareness and/or sensation, sedation aims to calm your dog and reduce reactivity.
Sedatives may make your dog very drowsy, but a sedated dog may still respond to painful, loud, or otherwise disruptive stimuli.
Sedation can be used for minor procedures, like putting a couple stitches in a wound.
When thinking of the types of anesthesia your dog might experience, consider several broad categories:
General anesthesia: General anesthesia is what a dog will experience for most surgical procedures. This involves loss of consciousness and pain.
Local anesthesia: Local anesthesia usually numbs a small region to cause complete lack of sensation.
Regional anesthesia: Regional anesthesia, such as an epidural, involves removing sensation from a large portion of the body. Regional anesthesia can help with pain control.
For example, a dog getting a hind limb amputation or a tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO) might benefit from regional anesthesia.
For most surgical procedures, the dog receives pre-anesthetic drugs to help cause sedation and reduce pain.
Then, a general anesthetic such as ketamine, propofol, or tiletamine and zolazepam (Telazol®), is injected directly into a muscle or vein to induce anesthesia.
In most cases, inhaled anesthetics like isoflurane or sevoflurane will keep a pup unconscious throughout their procedure.
A dog would need anesthetics for any procedure that will cause pain.
For major surgeries, this includes general anesthesia and potentially regional and/or local anesthesia. For small procedures like a skin biopsy, this might include local anesthesia with sedation.
Anesthesia is what makes surgery on animals possible. Its benefits include:
Prevention of the feeling of pain during surgery
Reduced post-surgical pain
Lack of consciousness during major procedures
Lack of memory of painful procedures
Lack of movement during delicate procedures
The cost of anesthesia is often included in the cost of the surgical procedure.
For a short, common procedure on a dog, such as a spay or neuter, the anesthesia itself is likely to cost under $100.
For emergencies, especially in unstable patients who require a lot of monitoring and intervention on the part of the anesthetist, the cost can be over $1,000 in addition to the surgical procedure.
If your pet is undergoing a planned surgical procedure, your veterinarian will usually give you pre-operative instructions. It’s common to fast a dog the night prior to a procedure to prevent them from vomiting while under anesthesia.
Usually, veterinarians will still allow your pet to drink water, but make sure to check with your veterinarian first.
Your veterinarian will perform a physical exam and may recommend lab work prior to the procedure to ensure your pet is an appropriate candidate for surgery.
If an intravenous (IV) catheter is to be placed, the veterinary team will put it on one of your dogs’ legs. Before undergoing general anesthesia, your dog will also receive pre-medications to cause sedation and reduce pain.
Once your pet is sedated, they may be intubated with an endotracheal tube to protect their airway and allow veterinary staff to help them breathe. In some cases, such as a very brief surgery like a neuter, pets may simply wear a mask during surgery rather than having a tube placed.
Anesthesia isn’t without its risks, some of which are life-threatening.
Examples of anesthetic complications include:
Aspiration pneumonia if the dog vomits
Injection site swelling
Nausea after surgery
Allergic reaction to medications
Organ failure after surgery
Seizures
Cardiac arrest
Death
However, the risk of death for dogs undergoing general anesthesia is very low.
A study published in 2022 found that out of 157,000 dogs who underwent anesthesia or sedation, only 0.10% of dogs (1 in 1,000) died within 48 hours and 0.14% (1.4 in 1,000) died within two weeks of surgery.
After anesthesia, your dog will begin recovery in the veterinary clinic.During this time, it’s not uncommon for dogs to vocalize and be anxious.
While pain could play a role, these behavioral changes are usually caused by drug-induced dysphoria, a state of unease, anxiety, and frustration caused by the medications.
For major surgical procedures, pups may remain in the hospital for 24/7 monitoring until they are cleared to return home. For minor procedures, they may go home with you the same day.
Anesthetics can slow your dog’s gastrointestinal tract, so your dog might take a day or two to recover their appetite and have bowel movements.
Some dogs experience nausea, which may be treated with vet-prescribed maropitant (Cerenia®). Call your veterinarian if your pet’s appetite isn’t normal within two days or if your pet is experiencing vomiting.
Your dog may also seem drowsy or have low energy for one to two days after their procedure.
Make sure to supply a comfortable resting area for your pet. You may consider restricting your pet to a crate if they’re crate-trained, or to a small room to minimize running and jumping.
Your dog may be activity-restricted depending on the procedure they had done, so make sure to follow your veterinarian’s instructions regarding cage rest, leash-walking, and any play restrictions.
For high-energy dogs, this activity restriction can be difficult.
Talk to your veterinarian about anti-anxiety medications like trazodone or gabapentin to help ease the stress of recovery.
If your pet has a surgical incision, protect it from self-trauma with a Comfy Cone™ or recovery suit.
Your veterinarian should let you know if your pup has any bathing restrictions or other incision care needs. Inquire with your veterinarian if they don’t include this information in your discharge instructions.
For most surgical procedures, there isn’t an alternative to anesthesia to make the procedure safe and pain-free. For minor procedures, like a small wound repair, the veterinarian may consider a local anesthetic with sedation.
How long an anesthetic stays in your dog’s system varies by the drug protocol used and your pet’s underlying health, but you can expect your dog to have side effects like drowsiness or reduced appetite for 12 to 24 hours after surgery.
A senior dog may have a longer recovery time than a young dog.
However, they should still return to consciousness relatively quickly after surgery but may show signs of confusion and sluggishness longer than younger dogs.
Speak with your veterinarian about your senior dog’s anesthetic risks.
It’s normal to be worried when your dog undergoes anesthesia.
For most healthy pets, anesthesia will go smoothly and without complication. Dogs who are overweight, have underlying health conditions, or are very young or old may have an increased risk of complications.
Speak with your veterinarian about your pet’s individual risk prior to undergoing anesthesia.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Rhiannon Koehler is a veterinarian and freelance medical writer. She received her Doctor of Veterinary Medicine and Master of Public...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.