megaflopp/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
Dog tooth extractions are commonly performed to remove diseased and painful teeth that develop due to various underlying dental health issues in dogs.
This procedure resolves pain and improves a dog’s quality of life.
Dog tooth extraction costs vary depending on the veterinary practice, but pet parents can expect to spend $500 to $2,500.
During a tooth extraction, a dog is placed under general anesthesia and a veterinarian gently separates the tooth from the surrounding tissues to remove it.
Medication may be placed inside the resulting hole, or it may be sutured closed to promote healing. The remainder of the dog’s teeth are cleaned and polished before waking them up from anesthesia.
Tooth extraction is very common in dogs, particularly for those with severe dental disease.
Dogs who have had head or face trauma, or chew on hard items such as bones, are more likely to have damaged teeth that need to be removed.
A dog’s tooth is made up of several parts. At the bottom is the root of the tooth, which is the pointed part hidden under the gum line.
The crown of the tooth is the top portion that is visible to pet parents, and the neck is where the root and the crown meet.
Additionally, each tooth is held in place by a periodontal ligament and surrounded by gums that cover the tooth roots.
During a simple tooth extraction, a veterinarian uses special tools to gently stretch the periodontal ligament and gum away from the tooth root. This loosens the tooth and allows it to be removed, ideally in one piece.
Some teeth, such as the carnassial teeth (which have multiple tooth roots), are harder to remove. They require drilling of bone and separation of the tooth into two or three pieces for easier removal.
There are several reasons why a veterinarian might recommend tooth extraction:
Periodontal disease. This common condition develops over time from plaque buildup on the teeth and beneath the gumline. This dental disease leads to inflammation, pain, and breakdown of the ligaments surrounding the teeth. Removing damaged teeth will improve a dog’s comfort.
Broken or fractured teeth. Dogs who sustain trauma or chew on hard objects may frequently break teeth. This can cause pain and discomfort that can be alleviated through tooth removal.
Malalignment or crowding. Teeth that are spaced abnormally or that are too close to others may require removal for comfort and improved alignment.
Tooth root abscess. Abscesses can occur at the root of the tooth due to infection. This creates a pocket of pus that leads to tooth instability and severe pain. The preferred treatment is tooth extraction.
Persistent deciduous teeth. Puppy teeth are supposed to fall out during teething and be replaced with adult teeth. In some cases these baby teeth remain, cause crowding when the adult teeth erupt, and should be removed.
Tumor. Tumors, whether cancerous or not, can develop in the mouth and may impact one or more teeth. If the tumor needs to be removed, surrounding teeth may also be extracted.
Tooth resorption. Teeth and their surrounding structures can start to gradually break down, leading to instability. Extraction of these teeth is typically recommended.
Tooth extractions are beneficial for dogs who are experiencing pain and discomfort from diseased or damaged teeth. Removing these teeth can provide relief and improve quality of life for dogs that are impacted.  
Specific benefits of dog tooth extraction can help to:
Encourage appetite
Eliminate oral infections
Decrease bad breath
Resolve pain and inflammation
Improve gum health
Correct an uneven bite
Allow permanent teeth space (in cases where baby teeth do not fall out)
Dog tooth extraction costs vary greatly, depending on the location of the veterinary clinic and the number and type of teeth being extracted.
Cost is highly dependent on each individual dog’s condition, but costs may range from $500 to $2,500. The higher range would be for complex cases treated by veterinary dentists, instead of your primary care veterinarian.  
If pet parents are struggling to pay for this procedure, there are several resources available to help with costs.
CareCredit is a health and wellness credit card that pet parents may qualify for so up-front costs are reduced.
Dental pet insurance is also an option to consider, as some plans may cover dog tooth removal costs provided the policy is in place before the extraction is needed.
Learn about CarePlus, insurance plans with exclusive Chewy benefits
Pet insurance that can cover Rx costs and more
Pet parents can prepare their dogs for this procedure by closely following their veterinarian’s specific instructions, which includes not allowing the dog to eat any food after midnight before the procedure.
At the veterinary hospital, your dog will have an exam to check for abnormalities and determine various parameters, including heart and respiratory rates.
Blood work and urinalysis are done to check their overall health prior to surgery.
Once it’s time for surgery, your dog will be given an injection of medication to make them more relaxed, so that a small area on their front leg can be shaved and cleaned prior to a catheter being placed into the vein.
Your dog will be given an anesthesia medication through this catheter through a tube in their trachea (throat), as well as oxygen, during the surgery.
Monitoring equipment, such as an EKG, is attached to ensure your dog stays safe during the procedure, and a warming blanket is used to maintain their temperature.
Depending on the veterinary clinic, X-rays may be done to better visualize the problem area prior to extracting the tooth.
Complications related to tooth extractions include risks associated with anesthesia, bleeding, swelling, pain, and infection.
Rarely, damage to surrounding teeth or the jawbone, such as accidental fractures, may occur. Due to pain being the most common side effect, prescription medications are generally given during recovery.
If you are concerned about tooth extractions, speak with your veterinarian about whether the benefits of extracting the tooth outweigh any risks.
After a dog has a tooth extracted, pet parents should expect their dog to be sleepy for the rest of the day following the procedure. They should return to “their normal” by the next morning.
Dogs may whimper from mild discomfort, but they should not appear to be experiencing significant pain. Small amounts of blood may be seen in their saliva after the tooth removal.
If a pet parent believes their dog is in a lot of pain or if there is a large amount of bleeding, they should contact the veterinarian for guidance as soon as possible.
During your dog’s recovery, pet parents may need to offer wet food that is easier to chew. Do not allow dogs to chew on hard toys or bones during recovery to avoid trauma to the healing site.
Pain medications such as Previcox® should be given as prescribed by their veterinarian to control the dog’s pain.
If an infection was present, antibiotics like clindamycin may also need to be given. Most dogs recover fully in 10 to 14 days.
The most effective treatment for diseased or damaged teeth is extraction. However, in some instances an alternative may be offered.
These may include vital pulp therapy or root canals that would be performed by a veterinary dentist.
Dogs typically heal from a tooth extraction 10 to 14 days after the procedure.
Dogs generally experience pain relief and an improved quality of life after a diseased or damaged tooth is removed.
Dogs don’t feel any pain during the extraction because they are under general anesthesia.
During recovery, they may feel discomfort and soreness for the first two to three days. This can be managed through pain medications provided by their veterinarian.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Brittany Kleszynski is a veterinarian and freelance medical writer who specializes in creating meaningful content that engages readers...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.