miniseries/E+ via Getty Images
Vets commonly ask questions about how often your dog poops and the appearance and consistency of the feces.
This may seem odd, but your veterinarian can learn a lot about your dog’s overall health from their poop. After discussing your dog’s bowel movements, your veterinarian may also perform a fecal test.
In this article, you'll learn all about fecal tests for dogs and why your vet may recommend one for your pup.
A fecal test is commonly performed to check your dog’s poop for parasites, such as:
Roundworms
Whipworms
Hookworms
Coccidia
Giardia
Tapeworms
Fecal testing can also be used to test for parvovirus.
In some cases, feces may be sent to a pathology lab to identify other infections, such as salmonella or Cryptosporidium canis.
Fecal testing is one of the most common diagnostic tests run when a dog has diarrhea.
It’s also a common part of annual wellness screenings for dogs, although some clinics recommend fecal testing for adult dogs every six months.
Fecal tests should be performed at least four times in a dog’s first year of life to identify parasites that commonly affect puppies.
Common types of fecal tests for dogs include:
Fecal flotation: The veterinary team examines a fecal sample for parasite eggs and protozoa such as coccidia.
SNAP tests: These tests can be used in your vet’s office to test for infections, such as parvovirus and giardia.
Other fecal tests—such as a culture (a test where they try to grow and identify pathogens like bacteria from a sample)—are less common and are usually performed at a reference laboratory.
The two main reasons a dog would need a fecal test are to screen for fecal parasites as part of routine wellness care and to rule out parasites or infections when a dog has diarrhea.
Fecal flotation involves adding a small sample of feces to a tube, mixing it with a special solution, and then putting the tube in a centrifuge.
The centrifuge is a laboratory machine that spins the sample at a very high speed.
Spinning the sample at a high speed causes the heavier fecal matter to collect at the bottom of the tube. Lighter materials, including parasite eggs, will float to the top of the tube.
A microscope slide is placed on top of the tube, which is then allowed to sit for 10 minutes.
This provides time for any parasite eggs to float to the top and stick to the slide. The slide is then viewed under a microscope.
False positives are rare, but false negatives are common because some parasites are shed in the feces intermittently or are difficult to identify.
SNAP tests detect the presence of an antigen, such as a protein component of a pathogen, in a dog’s feces.
Overall, SNAP tests are an effective method for diagnosing giardia and parvovirus infections.
However, false positives for giardia are possible in dogs who were recently infected and for parvovirus in dogs who were recently vaccinated.
False negatives for parvovirus may occur if the feces are watery, which can dilute the antigen, or if it contains a lot of blood.
Fecal tests for dogs are important for ensuring that a dog’s parasite prevention plan is effective and for detecting certain infectious diseases.
Pet parents should be aware that parasite preventives don’t prevent infection with protozoal organisms such as coccidia and giardia.
Dog fecal test costs depend on your geographic location, the type of test, and the type of clinic you visit. Generally, you can expect to pay $25 to $75 for each test.
You may be asked to bring a fecal sample to the clinic. Ideally, you should bring in at least a 1-inch piece of feces, so the clinic has enough to work with.
If your dog has diarrhea, you can scoop the feces into a container or poop bag.
Some clinics may send home a container you can use to collect a sample.
The sample should be less than 24 hours old. If you can’t visit the clinic as soon as you collect the sample, place the feces in a plastic bag or sealed container and store it in the refrigerator.
Generally, no other preparation is needed.
However, if you’re unable to collect a fecal sample, your veterinarian may need to obtain a sample by inserting a fecal loop into your dog’s rectum.
A fecal loop is a small, flexible rod with a loop at the end that is used to scoop a fecal sample out of the dog’s rectum.
SNAP tests take around eight minutes, so you can expect results quickly. A fecal flotation test takes about 20 minutes.
Please keep in mind that your veterinary clinic may also be seeing other patients, so they may not be able to run the test immediately.
If you’ve dropped off a fecal sample at the clinic for testing, clinic staff will usually call you with results later in the day.
A sample should be less than 24 hours old. If the sample isn’t immediately brought to the clinic after collection, it should be placed in a plastic bag or sealed container and stored in the refrigerator.
The best fecal test for dogs depends on what you are trying to determine.
For routine screening, a fecal flotation is usually sufficient. However, if you’re trying to detect giardia, a SNAP test is a better option.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Rhiannon Koehler is a veterinarian and freelance medical writer. She received her Doctor of Veterinary Medicine and Master of Public...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.