Alexandr Lebedko/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
Intravenous catheters, also called IV catheters, are small, hollow tubes that are placed within a vein. They are used in a variety of healthcare settings for humans and animals.
Medications, fluids, and blood transfusions are commonly given through IV catheters.
They are regularly used in dogs for a variety of reasons ranging from surgery to illnesses. When a dog gets an IV catheter, he will feel a short prick when it enters his skin and blood will flow from his vein through the tube. A cap will be placed on the end of the catheter to stop blood flow. It’s secured in place using tape and a bandage.  
While the IV catheter is in place, the dog should not feel any pain.
Dogs generally only have IV catheters while at the veterinary hospital.
The exception to this may be if a dog is being hospitalized during the day and the pet parent wants to take the dog home at night and return the next morning; then the IV catheter may be left in place.
Pet parents should closely watch their dog at home to make sure he doesn’t chew the catheter, and that it stays securely in place.
They should also watch for signs of swelling, warmth, or abnormal discharge at the IV site.
Dogs need IV catheters if they need medications or fluids given directly into a vein.
This may be for a routine surgery or for supportive care during an illness. Procedures that need IV catheters include:
Surgical procedures, including spays or neuters
Dispensing of medications, such as antibiotics
Blood transfusions
Fluid therapy
Nutritional support
Although this list doesn’t cover every issue, some conditions in dogs that typically need an IV catheter include: 
Kidney disease
Pancreatitis
Toxin ingestion
Snake bite
Anaphylactic reaction
Liver disease
Severe dehydration
Hemorrhagic diarrhea (sudden, bloody diarrhea)
Severe anemia
Heart disease
Tick-borne diseases, such as Lyme disease
Parvovirus
Gastroenteritis
Heatstroke
Addison’s disease
Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar)
Hypotension (low blood pressure)
Certain cancers, such as lymphoma (for chemotherapy treatment)
The most common risk with IV catheter use is inflammation (swelling) of the vein, also called phlebitis.
This can result in the leg becoming swollen and hot while also causing discomfort for the dog. If left untreated, it can lead to an infection within the surrounding tissue that can travel through the bloodstream.
Other possible risks include blood clot formation, extravasation (when medication or fluids leak from the catheter into surrounding tissue), and occlusion (blockage) of the IV catheter.  
These may stop the IV catheter from working properly. In rare instances, complications of IV catheters can be fatal if not promptly addressed.
In dogs used in a study who had IV catheters placed, 13% to 24% experienced complications.
Dogs undergoing surgery benefit from IV catheters because they can get anesthetic medications, fluid therapy, and antibiotics if needed. Also, having an IV catheter in place before surgery allows a quick response if there is an emergency and medications or fluids need to be given. 
Dogs who are hospitalized for sickness benefit from IV catheters because they can get the right supportive care and continuous fluid therapy.
If blood needs to be drawn several times while the dog is hospitalized, a veterinarian can use the IV catheter rather than poking the dog multiple times in different veins, which can lead to more bruising and pain.
IV catheters are highly effective. They are an important tool that veterinarians use regularly in the hospital setting.  
IV catheters themselves are relatively inexpensive, and the procedure typically ranges from $15 to $30 depending on the veterinary practice.
Medications and fluids given through the IV catheter are not included in that estimate.
Various pet insurance companies—each with their own guidelines and coverage options—may cover these costs.
Pet parents should check with their pet insurance company to find out whether treatments or procedures involving IV catheters are covered.
There are no specific preparations that a pet parent should do at home before an IV catheter placement. Preparing the dog will be done by the veterinary team.
To place an IV catheter into the dog’s vein, a veterinary technician will first shave the area of the skin and disinfect it with a solution such as chlorhexidine gluconate. An assistant gently restrains the dog to keep her calm and her leg still during the IV placement.
The veterinary technician carefully puts the catheter into the vein until blood enters the tube. Then they slide the catheter gently away from the stylet and into the vein until the hub (the wider top portion of the tube) touches the dog’s skin.
It’s kept in place with medical tape and self-adhering wrap.  Your dog may need to wear a recovery cone while the IV catheter is in place to prevent her from chewing or licking it.
If a dog needs fluid therapy but can’t get an IV catheter, subcutaneous fluids can be given underneath the skin. Likewise, medications can be given underneath the skin or in the muscle. These routes do not work as quickly as an IV, but they are still effective in many cases.
However, dogs who are critically ill or severely dehydrated typically don’t respond well to this type of treatment because they need supportive care quickly via an IV catheter.
Similarly, dogs undergoing anaphylaxis need IV catheters for the best outcome instead of any alternatives.
IV catheters can stay in a dog as long as they are needed if there are no signs of inflammation, infection, or occlusion. Even without these complications, each IV catheter should be removed and replaced by a new one, according to the hospital’s guidelines.
IV catheters should be changed about every three days. Each veterinary hospital may have their own guidelines that they follow.
 Simpson S, Zersen K. Incidence and type of peripheral intravenous catheter complications documented in hospitalised dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2023;64(3):130–135.

Simpson S, Zersen K. Incidence and type of peripheral intravenous catheter complications documented in hospitalised dogs. Journal of Small Animal Practice. 2023;64(3):130–135.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Brittany Kleszynski is a veterinarian and freelance medical writer who specializes in creating meaningful content that engages readers...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.