Capuski/E+ via Getty Images
Laser therapy for dogs is an alternative therapy used to manage pain, inflammation (swelling), and wound healing. The interaction between light from the laser and the dog’s tissues is called photobiomodulation. Laser therapy uses light of a single wavelength ranging from visible red to infrared.
When your pup gets a therapeutic laser treatment, they’re getting a low-level or cold laser therapy. Cold laser therapies for dogs lower pain and encourage healing by:
Causing the release of endorphins
Decreasing the release of inflammatory chemicals
Causing lymphatic vessels to dilate (expand so fluid moves out of the tissue)
Increasing blood flow to an area
Most dogs are not sedated for this procedure and rest comfortably during treatment.
Laser therapy is usually done on an outpatient basis, with sessions typically lasting 15 to 30 minutes. A very small wound, however, may only take a couple of minutes while multiple joints may take closer to an hour.
Some conditions, such as wounds, can be treated daily. Chronic conditions like arthritis are usually treated several times a week when the dog first starts treatment, with longer intervals over time until the dog reaches a maintenance plan.
Laser therapy for dogs is not a standard practice that’s widely available now, but it’s gaining in popularity. You’re more likely to find laser therapy available at specialty clinics or rehabilitation facilities, but some private practices may also offer the treatment.
Laser therapy for dogs may be helpful for a variety of conditions, but common examples include:
Arthritis pain
Surgical incision healing
Wound healing
Soft tissue injuries, such as tendon or ligament sprains or strains
Lick granulomas
Some pets have limited options for pain management, such as animals with severe liver disease that cannot take conventional pain medications. As a result, they may rely on alternative therapies like laser therapy to help manage their pain.
Laser therapy for dogs can reduce pain, reduce inflammation, and encourage healing.
Dogs getting laser therapy usually don’t need to be sedated unless they’re too excited or stressed to stay still. The veterinarian doesn’t need to shave or clip the area either.
Overall, this is an easy treatment to give, dogs tend to respond well, and negative side effects are unlikely.
A 2020 study showed that dogs with arthritis who received laser therapy were shown to have less pain, as decided by their veterinarian and pet parent.
Parents in this study reported improvements in quality of life after the first session, with increased improvement over the eight-week study duration. Other studies corroborate these findings, but more high-quality studies are needed.
For wound healing, some studies have shown significant improvement for dogs that receive laser treatment, while others haven’t. Importantly, laser therapy for dogs doesn’t appear to have significant negative impacts.
The cost of laser therapy for dogs varies depending on what condition is being treated, whether it is long-term or short-term treatment, and your geographic location, among other variables.
An estimated range for the cost of treatment is $40 to $100 per session. Your veterinarian may provide a bundle price for a set of treatments.
Most dogs do very well in laser therapy and do not need preparation before treatment.
If your pet has a lot of anxiety, speak with your veterinarian about giving them anti-anxiety medications one to two hours before their session.
Examples of medications your veterinarian may recommend to encourage relaxation include trazodone, gabapentin, acepromazine, and melatonin.
During the treatment, your pet will likely rest on a comfortable pad with goggles on their head to protect your pet’s vision.
You could train them to lie down on command and get them comfortable, and dog goggles can be introduced before laser therapy to help speed the process.
If done using the right settings and treatment lengths, laser therapy for dogs is safe. However, it’s possible that a laser can cause burns if not used correctly.
Laser therapy should not be used on tumors, the eyes, testicles, growth plates in bones, or a pregnant uterus.
Laser therapy for dogs doesn’t come with any specific recovery period. Most pets tolerate it very well.
Your veterinarian may have specific instructions for your pet, based on their underlying health conditions.
In most cases, laser therapy for dogs is part of a multimodal treatment plan, meaning it isn’t the only treatment used for reducing pain and inflammation. Many of the treatments below can be given to your pet along with laser therapy.
Because laser therapy is often given to reduce pain and inflammation, consider the following for your pet:
Ask your veterinarian about other pain medications like carprofen, grapiprant, meloxicam, deracoxib, gabapentin, and buprenorphine.
Ask your veterinarian if other alternative treatments—such as acupuncture, massage, hydrotherapy, or joint supplements—could be helpful for your pet.
Laser therapy is thought of as an effective treatment for reducing pain and inflammation, and it can help with wound healing. Keep in mind that laser therapy is usually recommended as part of a treatment plan, rather than the sole treatment.
Laser therapy can be used with other treatments for multiple conditions that may affect your dog’s ability to walk, such as intervertebral disc disease (IVDD) or osteoarthritis.
However, whether your dog’s walking ability gets better will depend on the specific underlying cause, the severity and length of the condition, and what other treatment options are used. Not all dogs that have lost the ability to walk—particularly if there is paralysis from a neurological cause—will be able to walk again.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Rhiannon Koehler is a veterinarian and freelance medical writer. She received her Doctor of Veterinary Medicine and Master of Public...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.