shironosov/iStock / Getty Images Plus via Getty Images
Having your dog’s leg amputated, or surgically removed, is a procedure your veterinarian will not recommend lightly. In most cases, it’s the only available option or is recommended as a last resort or as a palliative measure to prevent worsening pain.
Although leg amputation in dogs may sound extreme, the procedure provides a successful outcome for many pups. In one study, 91% of pet parents reported no change in their dog’s general attitude after amputation.
Before amputation, your veterinarian will check your dog’s other limbs for any issues—such as a cruciate ligament tear, arthritis, or cancer—that could indicate your dog is not a good candidate for the procedure. Large or overweight dogs may also not be good candidates, as they may not do well with only three legs. 
Leg amputation in dogs can be performed on any limb, and dogs may even have multiple limbs amputated. Most often, the limb is amputated as close to the body as possible.
Types of leg amputations in dogs include:
A forelimb amputation involves removing the entire limb, from the toes to the shoulder joint.
A hind limb amputation is performed at the hip bone. The muscles, blood vessels, and nerves that are removed with the limb are tied off during the procedure, and the remaining skin is closed over the incision.
Partial limb amputation with the use of a prosthetic is not always an option and can lead to complications for dogs. The remaining part of the limb can become damaged from attempted use or may interfere with movement.
The forelimb leg of a dog consists of four major bones: the scapula and humerus (upper arm), which are connected at the shoulder joint, and the radius and ulna, which connect with the humerus at the elbow joint.
The hind limb leg is similarly connected: the hip joint connects the pelvis to the femur (thigh bone) and the knee is connected by the femur, tibia, and fibula (shin bones).
Both limbs are connected to either the carpus (wrist) in the forelimb or tarsus (ankle) in the hind limb and the paws are made up of many smaller bones.
Leg amputation in dogs may be recommended in cases where it’s likely a pup will suffer from long-term pain, poor mobility, or an overall decreased quality of life if the leg is not removed.
For example, osteosarcoma, a common bone cancer, is extremely painful, and amputation can be an effective treatment option. 
Other reasons for amputation include:
Trauma
Severe arthritis
Fracture that cannot be repaired or that carries a high risk of complications or surgical failure
Infection
Non-healing wounds
Elbow joint luxation (dislocation)
Poor blood flow due to a blood clot
Birth defect resulting in a crooked or nonfunctional limb
Neuropathy associated with brachial plexus avulsion
Paralysis
Amputation typically improves a dog’s quality of life because the source of pain and discomfort is no longer present.
It’s important to note that while “tripod” dogs may have only three legs, they can enjoy long, healthy lives and often don’t require any specialized or ongoing care after their surgical wound heals.
Leg amputation can be the safest, least demanding, and most cost-effective treatment option for a variety of diseases. 
According to the American College of Veterinary Surgeons, the prognosis for dogs maintaining functional use of their remaining limbs is good. 
After a recovery period, most dogs will return to a normal or near-normal level of activity.
The cost of leg amputation in dogs varies, and depends on the size of the dog, the leg amputated (forelimb or hind limb), and the facility.
In general, you can expect to pay $5,000 to $7,000 or more for the procedure. Most pet insurance companies typically cover some or all of the cost unless specifically stated in their terms and conditions. Alternative payment options may include applying for CareCredit or setting up a payment plan, if available.
Your veterinarian will ask you to not feed your dog overnight and to arrive at the veterinary hospital early in the morning.
After you complete the necessary paperwork, your dog will be hospitalized and have their blood drawn for pre-anesthetic testing, and an intravenous (IV) catheter will be placed. The veterinarian will perform an exam, review the blood work results, and give pain medication and a sedative.
Once your dog is relaxed, they will be placed under anesthesia and an endotracheal tube (breathing tube) will be placed to allow the delivery of oxygen and anesthetic gas throughout the procedure. Then, the surgery site will be shaved and sterilely prepared.
An estimated 13% of dogs experience complications from amputation surgery, although most are minor and treated medically or with minor follow-up surgery. Possible complications include:
Inflammation at the incision site
Infection at the incision site
Seroma (fluid pocket under the skin)
Neuroma formation (firm swellings that develop on cut nerves that must be treated medically or surgically removed)
Phantom pain or pain at the amputation site, which is extremely rare
Hernia after hind limb removal
Failure to adapt to life with three legs
Most dogs are hospitalized for several days following amputation surgery. Aside from having their sutures removed in a few weeks, most dogs do not need any follow-up care.
Be sure to follow your veterinarian’s instructions regarding medications, exercise, and incision care. Consulting a veterinary rehabilitation specialist can help improve your dog’s mobility and recovery time.
By making a few simple changes, you can ease your dog’s adjustment and improve their well-being.
These include:
Providing a therapeutic bed to decrease pressure on your dog’s bones and joints
Using ramps, toe grips, and rugs to increase grip and reduce slipping and falling
Raising your dog’s food and water bowls to ease access
Using a harness or sling to reduces stress when helping your dog upstairs or lifting them in and out of the car
Monitoring your yard for tripping hazards and uneven terrain
Carrying your dog up and down the stairs or blocking access to them
Monitoring your dog’s weight
There are many studies that highlight the successful outcome and pet parents’ satisfaction with leg amputation in dogs.
Many pet parents (73%) report that their dog walked without support at the time of discharge and was able to walk without any assistance after two weeks. Some report that their dogs were able to participate in normal activities with a stamina like that before their amputation.
However, it will require some time for your dog to become accustomed to living with three legs and learn to compensate by redistributing their weight.
Leg amputation in dogs is often recommended when other treatment options are not feasible.
However, for dogs that are extremely obese or have underlying orthopedic or neurologic disease, long-term management with pain medications, radiation, or chemotherapy may be required.
Leg amputation in dogs is considered the safest, least demanding, and most cost-effective treatment option for a variety of diseases and can provide even senior dogs with a better quality of life.
Speak with your veterinarian about the risks and benefits based on your dog’s individual needs. 
Many times, leg amputation is considered a last-resort treatment option. Without amputation, your dog may suffer from debilitating pain and poor mobility and may risk fracturing the limb.
 Billas A, et al. Incidence of and risk factors for surgical site infection following canine limb amputation. Veterinary Surgery. 2022;51(3):418–425.
Dickerson V, et al. Outcomes of dogs undergoing limb amputation, owner satisfaction with limb amputation procedures, and owner perceptions regarding postsurgical adaptation: 64 cases (2005-2012). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 2015;247(7):786–792.
Fahie M. Complications in Small Animal Surgery. Chapter 109, Amputation. John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2016.
Kirpensteijn J, Van Den Bos R, and Endenburg N. Adaptation of dogs to the amputation of a limb and their owners’ satisfaction with the procedure. The Veterinary Record. 1999;144(5):115–118.

Billas A, et al. Incidence of and risk factors for surgical site infection following canine limb amputation. Veterinary Surgery. 2022;51(3):418–425.
Dickerson V, et al. Outcomes of dogs undergoing limb amputation, owner satisfaction with limb amputation procedures, and owner perceptions regarding postsurgical adaptation: 64 cases (2005-2012). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association. 2015;247(7):786–792.
Fahie M. Complications in Small Animal Surgery. Chapter 109, Amputation. John Wiley & Sons, Inc; 2016.
Kirpensteijn J, Van Den Bos R, and Endenburg N. Adaptation of dogs to the amputation of a limb and their owners’ satisfaction with the procedure. The Veterinary Record. 1999;144(5):115–118.
WRITTEN BY
Veterinarian
Dr. Michael Kearley graduated from the University of Florida College of Veterinary Medicine in 2013. He graduated with a certificate in...
Was this article helpful?
Sign up for weekly pet health tips and insights from our veterinarians.